



Full text of "Everything about dogs"











 






Skip to main content




Ask the publishers to restore access to 500,000+ books.


































Hamburger icon
An icon used to represent a menu that can be
                toggled by interacting with this icon.







Internet Archive logo
A line drawing of the Internet Archive headquarters
                building façade.
















































Web icon
An illustration of a computer
                            application window



Wayback Machine









Texts icon
An illustration of an open book.
                          




Texts









Video icon
An illustration of two cells of a film
                            strip.



Video









Audio icon
An illustration of an audio speaker.
                          








Audio









Software icon
An illustration of a 3.5" floppy
                            disk.




Software









Images icon
An illustration of two photographs.
                          



Images









Donate icon
An illustration of a heart shape
                          




Donate









Ellipses icon
An illustration of text ellipses.
                          



More













Donate icon
An illustration of a heart shape



"Donate to the archive"









User icon
An illustration of a person's head and chest.
                    




Sign up
                  |
                  Log in








Upload icon
An illustration of a horizontal line over an up
                pointing arrow.


Upload





Search icon
An illustration of a magnifying glass.











Search icon
An illustration of a magnifying glass.















Internet Archive Audio


Live Music
                    Archive

Librivox
                    Free Audio



Featured


All Audio

Grateful Dead

Netlabels

Old Time Radio


78 RPMs
                        and Cylinder Recordings




Top


Audio Books
                        & Poetry

Computers,
                        Technology and Science

Music, Arts
                        & Culture

News &
                        Public Affairs

Spirituality
                        & Religion

Podcasts

Radio News
                        Archive





Images


Metropolitan Museum

Cleveland
                    Museum of Art



Featured


All Images

Flickr Commons


Occupy Wall
                        Street Flickr

Cover Art

USGS Maps




Top


NASA Images

Solar System
                        Collection

Ames Research
                        Center





Software


Internet
                    Arcade

Console Living Room



Featured


All Software


Old School
                        Emulation

MS-DOS Games


Historical
                        Software

Classic PC
                        Games

Software
                        Library




Top


Kodi
                        Archive and Support File

Vintage
                        Software

APK

MS-DOS

CD-ROM
                        Software

CD-ROM
                        Software Library

Software Sites


Tucows
                        Software Library

Shareware
                        CD-ROMs

Software
                        Capsules Compilation

CD-ROM Images


ZX Spectrum

DOOM Level CD






Texts


Open Library

American
                    Libraries



Featured


All Texts

Smithsonian
                        Libraries

FEDLINK (US)

Genealogy

Lincoln
                        Collection




Top


American
                        Libraries

Canadian
                        Libraries

Universal
                        Library

Project
                        Gutenberg

Children's
                        Library

Biodiversity
                        Heritage Library

Books by
                        Language

Additional
                        Collections





Video


TV News

Understanding
                    9/11



Featured


All Video

Prelinger
                        Archives

Democracy Now!


Occupy Wall
                        Street

TV NSA Clip
                        Library




Top


Animation
                        & Cartoons

Arts & Music


Computers
                        & Technology

Cultural
                        & Academic Films

Ephemeral Films


Movies

News &
                        Public Affairs

Spirituality
                        & Religion

Sports Videos

Television

Videogame
                        Videos

Vlogs

Youth Media










                          Search the history of over __WB_PAGES_ARCHIVED__
                          web pages
                          on the Internet.
                          









Search the Wayback Machine




Search icon
An illustration of a magnifying
                                glass.








Mobile Apps



Wayback Machine (iOS)


Wayback Machine (Android)


Browser Extensions



Chrome


Firefox


Safari


Edge




Archive-It Subscription



Explore the Collections


Learn More


Build Collections






Save Page Now
Capture a web page as it appears now for use as a trusted
                          citation in the future.




Please enter a valid web address








About

Blog
Projects

Help
Donate

Contact

Jobs
Volunteer

People
















Sign up for free
              




Log in
              












          Search metadata
        



          Search text contents
        



          Search TV news captions
        



          Search radio transcripts
        



          Search archived web sites
        

Advanced Search







About



Blog



Projects



Help



Donate

Donate icon
An illustration of a heart shape







Contact



Jobs



Volunteer



People












          Full text of "Everything about dogs"
        

See other formats


i rf~^*~*n rrrrTTTTl — ir  in'         iiiiiiiiini      i  rr-rnrmwwrTnrmiirriiimiiwniiiii ■miiiin— n»nn 1 1 i—iii    i 


EVERYTHING  ABOUT  DOGS 

BY 

AL  G.  EBERHART 


ir^«iii...ii..lrM»n«. 


:3\£ 


TUFTS   UNIVERSITY   LIBRARIES 


3  9090   014   530  725 


Webster  Family  Library  of  Veterinary  Medici 
Cummings  School  of  Veterinary  Medicine  al 
Tufts  University 
200  Westboro  Road  ^ 


gpj  "ill'  ^lfoln  ^^ln         ==Tfo 

THIRD  EDITION,  1917    Copyrighted  by  A.  G.  Eberhart 

YT 

t"     gllllllllllllllli  lllllllll]|illl!| 

\i  iniiiiiiiiiiiiii    ABOUT   iiiniiiiiiiiiiig  |V| 

Cr  |iiiiiiiiiiii     ^^  /^  ^^  ^?     liiiniiiiiiiii!|  ^* 

Written  and  Compiled  by 

AL.  G.  EBERHART 

Proprietor  of 

The  Eberhart  Kennels 

Camp  Dennison,  -  Ohio 

/  —  ALL  HIS  LIFE  IN  DOGS 


TEARING  a  puppy  — and  properly  caring  for  it  through  life — 'till  it 
dies  from  old  age— and  is  buried  in  the  yard.  Caring  for  dogs 
in  health,  treating  all  diseases,  teaching  them  good  habits,  and  cor- 
recting bad  ones.  Breeding  and  rearing  puppies,  properly  feeding 
dogs,  and  advice  given  on  matters  pertaining  to  the  dog's  welfare 
that  have  never  been  given  in  similar  works.  Containing  also  many 
VALUABLE  PRESCRIPTIONS,  now  made  public  for  the  first  time. 


lUI 


Sent  by  Mail  Postpaid,  Upon  Receipt  of  Price 
Paper  Bound  $1.10  Cloth  Bound  $1.60 

Published  for  AL.  G.    EBERHART 

by  the 

FIELD  AND  FANCY  PUBLISHING   CORP. 

14  Church  Street,  New  York  City 

^jj  an  ==ilf51li  =Jlli nff 


Insist  Upon  Your  Dealer  Supplying  You  With 

Spratt's  Dog  Cakes 
and  Puppy  Biscuits 

Remember  that  a  dog  fed  on  SPRATT'S  is  always  a  credit  to  his  master 

At  three  shows  recently  over  3,000  prizes  were  won  by 
dogs  fed  regularly  and  exclusively  on  SPRATT'S  DOG  FOODS 

To  owners  of  Pekingese,  Toys  and  "shy  feeders" 
we  recommend 

SPRATT'S  FIBO 

The  most  appetizing  granulated 
dog  food  on  the  market 

ASK  FOR 

Spratt's  Improved 
Mollicoddles 


A  valuable  and  easily  digested 
cake,    suitable    for    puppies, 
exotic  breeds,  etc. 
^f\v       Send     stamp     for    cata- 
logue which   contains 
valuable      informa- 
tion       regarding 
general     man- 
agement, 
feed  i  n  g  , 
etc. 


SPRATT'S  PATENT  LIMITED 


NEWARK,  NEW  JERSEY 

SAN  FRANCISCO  ST.  LOUIS  CLEVELAND 

Factory  also  in  LONDON,   ENGLAND 


MONTREAL 


THIRD    EDITION     1917 

EVERYTHING  ABOUT 


DOGS 


EDITED  AND  COMPILED   BY 

AL.  G.  EBERHART, 


ALL  HIS  LIFE  A  DOG  FANCIER 


Treating  and  caring  for  dogs  in  disease  and  health,  breeding,  feed- 
ing, and  rearing  puppies.  Teaching  dogs  good  habits  and  correcting  bad 
ones.  Advice  given  and  matters  written  on  pertaining  to  the  dog's  wel- 
fare, that  no  similar  work  has  yet  contained.  Also  many  VALUABLE 
PRESCRIPTIONS  now  made  public  for  the  first  time,  in  fact, 

Taking  proper  care  of  a  dog  from  its  birth — through  life — 
till  it  dies  from  old  age — and  is  buried  in  the  yard. 


Published  for 


The  Eberhart  Kennels, 

CAMP  DENISON,  OHIO 

by 

THE  FIELD  AND  FANCY  PUBLISHING  CORPORATION, 
14  CHURCH  STREET,  NEW  YORK  CITY. 


fv^S 


Copyrighted   by 
AL.   G.   EBERHART 

1917. 


MY   CREED. 


SO  NOT  keep  the  alabaster  boxes  of  your  love  and  tenderness  sealed 
up  until  your  friends  are  dead.  Fill  their  lives  with  sweetness. 
Speak  approving,  cheering  words  while  their  ears  can  hear 
them,  and  while  their  hearts  can  be  thrilled  and  made  happier 
by  them;  the  kind  things  you  mean  to  say  when  they  are  gone,  say 
before  they  go.  The  flowers  you  mean  to  send  for  their  coffins,  send 
to  brighten  and  sweeten  their  homes  before  they  leave  them.  If  my 
friends  have  alabaster  boxes  laid  away,  full  of  fragrant  perfumes  of 
sympathy  and  affection,  which  they  intend  to  break  over  my  dead  body, 
I  would  rather  they  would  bring  them  out  in  my  weary  and  troubled 
hours,  and  open  them,  that  I  may  be  refreshed  and  cheered  by  them 
while  I  need  them.  I  would  rather  have  a  plain  coffin  without  a 
flower,  a  funeral  without  a  eulogy,  than  a  life  without  the  sweetness 
of  love  and  sympathy.  Let  us  learn  to  anoint  our  friends  beforehand 
for  their  burial.  Post-mortem  kindness  does  not  cheer  the  troubled 
spirit.  Flowers  on  the  coffin  cast  no  fragrance  backward  over  life's 
weary  way. 


Always  for  Dogs — Faithfully  yours 


THE  AMERICAN  FIELD 

THE    SPORTSMAN'S    JOURNAL 
THE  RECOGNIZED  AUTHORITY 

ESTABLISHED  1874  PUBLISHED  WEEKLY 

The  AMERICAN  FIELD  is  the  Sportsman's  Newspapers  of  America,  col- 
lecting news  by  its  own  staff  representatives  and  special  reporters, 
giving  authoritative  reports  of  leading  events  in  the  fancier's  and 
sportsman's  world.  Its  recreative  columns  are  always  replete  with 
interesting  articles  and  contributions,  and  open  a  wide  field  for 
discussion  of  all  subjects  that  interest  fanciers  and  sportsmen. 

The  Departments  of  the  AMERICAN  FIELD  are:  Editorial,  Game  and 
Shooting,  Fish  and  Fishing,  Natural  History,  Fox  Hunting,  Kennel, 
Trap  Shooting',  Rifle,  Revolver,  Pistol,  Queries  and  Answers. 

Field  Dog'  Stud  Book  registrations  published  every  week. 

If  you  want  to  know  what  is  going  on  in  the 

KENNEL    WORLD 

subscribe  for  the  AMERICAN  FIELD,  or  send  for  a  sample  copy, 
that  will  be  sent  you  free  on  request. 

To    Breeders    and    Fanciers 

If  you  are  interested  in  Setters  and  Pointers,  send  for  American  Field 
Futurity  blanks,  sent  free. 

If  you  are  interested  in  authentic  registrations  send  for  Field  Dog  Stud 
Book  registration  blanks,  sent  free. 

If  you  are  interested  in  dogs  in  any  way  send  One  Dollar  for  three 
months'  trial  subscription.  If  not  more  than  satisfied  with  it  the 
money  will  be  refunded  on  request. 

Address 

American  Field  Publishing  Co. 

801  Masonic  Temple  Chicago 


KIPLING    SAID 

"Buy  a   pup  and  your  money  will  buy  love  unflinching  that  can- 
not lie." 


INTRODUCTORY  REMARKS. 


A  Plain  and  Common  Sense 
Talk  About 

&&    DOGS    &e 

AT  LAST!  The  crowning  and  final  effort  of  my  life — 
for  dogs — is  accomplished,  and  this  third  and  final  edition 
of  "EVERYTHING  ABOUT  DOGS"   is   out. 

Many  days  and  nights  'till  the  clock  would  strike  up  to  three  in  the 
morning,  have  I  sat  at  my  desk  and  written,  handicapped  by  my  eyes,  (one 
of  them  having  been  operated  on  and  a  cataract  removed),  and  when  1 
started  this  book  I  was  afraid  the  strain  on  them  would  be  more  than  they 
could  stand,  but  took  the  chance,  for  I  felt  it  was  my  duty  to  dogs,  because 
I  knew  how  much  good  it  would  do  dogs,  to  get  to  the  dog  owners  of  this 
country  what  is  in  this  book,  and  my  reward  for  all  this  labor  of  love  is 
ever  present  within  me,  and  I  am  now  fully  repaid,  aside  from  the  profit 
consideration  part  of  it  in  dollars,  and  this  part  not  so  great  as  it  should 
have  been,  due  to  the  inflated  cost  of  paper  and  everything  else  pertaining 
to  attempting  to  get  out  a  book  in  war  times,  but  I  never  started  to  do 
anything  and  changed  my  mind,  or  failed  to  get  through  with  it.  I've  had 
human  friends  "change  their  minds" — and  fail  me — in  time  of  need,  but 
never  a  dog — and  this  is  another  "difference"  between  a  man  and  a  dog. 
The  word  "man"  used  here,  applies  to  both  sexes  in  humans — as  I  have 
found  it,  even  if  the  women  are  now  voting  in  several  states.  I  want  to 
say,  before  going  any  further,  that  I  am  not  writing  through  any  spirit  of 
egotism  or  self-flattery,  not  "throwing  bouquets  at  myself" — (never  could 
stand  for  this  in  anyone),  and  I  hope  you  will  not  misjudge  me  as  to  this, 
for  I've  been  truthful  and  honest  all  my  life,  and  will  keep  it  up  this  way. 
There  never  was  another  "dog  book"  just  like  this — others  may  be  larger, 
more  pretentious,  the  language  used  of  a  higher  grade — and  all  that,  but 
this  book  is  what  I  believe,  and  feel,  will  accomplish  its  ami— to  do  good 
to  dogs — and  that's  what  I  wrote  it  for.  There  is  so  much  in  the  book 
that  is  good  (not  all  my  own  real  knowledge),  but  this  book  means,  and  isr^— 


the  best  knowledge  that  could  be  gathered  together,  from  my  experience  of 
all  my  life  in  dogs,  and  of  others,  more  wise  than  I. 

It  has  all  been  done  for  dogs,  my  love  for  dogs,  my  earnest  and  upper- 
most desire  through  all  the  many  years  of  my  life — do  good  to  dogs,  and  1 
have  been  hunting  for — saving  up — trying  and  digesting  carefully,  every- 
thing herein,  so  as  to  feel  reasonably  sure  it  was  good  for  dogs,  and  the 
book  is  put  out  with  a  most  comfortable  feeling  that  it  will  do  a  mighty 
lot  of  good  to  dogs.  Humans  may  "bite"  you,  (watch  out  for  that  bite, 
for  I  know),  but  never  will  your  dog  bite  you — and  harm  you.  Often 
bitten  by  dogs  I  have  been,  but  the  dog  did  not  know  he  was  biting  his 
best  friend,  but  the  humans  who  did  "bite"  me — they  knew. 

My  father  was  a  minister  for  forty  years,  and  I  used  to  have  the  idea 
that  I  would  get  into  Heaven  on  the  "family  ticket,"  but  I  now  believe, 
that  should  I  fail  on  this,  that  what  I've  done  for  dogs  will  pass  me  in — 
(or  ought  to) — anyhow,  I've  two  chances.  I  made  my  will  not  long  ago, 
and  in  it  a  provision  as  to  a  home  for  each  of  the  dogs  in  the  kennel  when 
I  am  called  away,  (you  should  do  the  same),  and  when  it's  time  to  go  to  the 
mysterious  beyond,  about  the  last  comforting  feeling  will  be,  that  my  loved 
dogs  will  be  cared  for  nearly  as  well  as  I  have  done  for  them. 

In  a  preface  to  a  former  edition  I  said  to  own  a  thoroughbred  dog, 
so  as  not  to  have  to  apologise  to  your  friends  when  they  saw  your  dog, 
but  I  want  to  change  this  now — to,  own  a  dog — any  kind  of  a  dog,  even  if 
not  pedigreed — just  so  it's  a  dog — so  you  can  make  that  one  dog  happy.  My 
heart  aches,  often,  when  I  see  a  poor  homeless  cur  on  the  streets,  hungry 
and  thirsty — and  if  it  were  possible,  I  would  take  that  dog  home — but  there 
is  a  limit  to  everything.  That  night,  after  in  bed,  I  lay  awake,  thinking  of 
that  poor,  homeless  dog  I  met  on  the  street  in  the  city  today. 

By  this  time  many  who  read  this  will  have  decided  that  I  am  a 
"krank" — so  I  am — as  to  dogs —  and  proud  of  it.  The  "curs"  you  see  on 
the  streets,  homeless  and  friendless,  are  to  be  blamed  for,  because  of  the 
owners  of  female  dogs,  that  were  not  kept  up,  but  were  allowed  to  run 
loose  on  the  street  when  in  season,  (but  should  have  been),  and  here  is 
where  the  mongrels  come  from.  There  ought  to  be  a  law  in  every  state 
that  when  a  female  is  in  season,  she  must  be  kept  confined  till  over  it,  or, 
a  penalty  of  a  fine  of  twenty-five  dollars,  for  here  is  where  these  "curs" 
come  from.  If  you  see  or  meet  one  of  these  poor  "unfortunates,"  if  you 
can't  give  him  a  home  yourself,  try  to  get  some  friend  to  take  the  dog  and 
give  it  the  home  any  and  every  dog  deserves. 

Twenty-two  thousand  of  my  former  two  editions  of  this  book  were  sold, 
a  wonderful  record,  beating  the  combined  sales  of  all  the  other  dog  books 
ever  published,  and  I  only  wish  it  were  possible  to  publish  the  thousands  of 
letters  I  have  received  unsolicited — for  they  have  made  my  heart  glad — 
often — when  it  needed  it  too. 


You  can't  do  too  much  for  dogs,  and  all  you  do  for  them  they  will  re- 
pay you  a  hundred  fold. 

When  you  get  a  dog,  arrange  to  care  for  it  properly;  provide  a  suitable 
place  for  it  to  live  and  sleep,  and  especially  see  to  it  that  your  dog  gets 
plenty  of  exercise,  which  is  as  essentially  necessary  as  food  and  water  to 
keep  it  in  health. 

When  you  take  your  dog  for  a  walk,  teach  him  to  mind  you;  if  he 
runs  too  far  ahead,  call  him  back,  and  never  allow  him  to  cross  over  the 
street  ahead  of  you,  as  any  dog  is  liable  to  do  should  he  see  another  dog  on 
the  other  side.  A  dog's  judgment  is  faulty  as  to  how  quick  he  can  get  over  . 
In  front  of  a  car  coming,  and  when  he  sees  the  other  dog  he  forgets  all 
this  and  doesn't  see  or  hear  the  electric  car  or  auto  that  is  rapidly  coming  up 
or  down  the  street.  Many  a  dog  has  been  killed  this  way,  even  when  out 
with  his  master  or  mistress,  because  they  were  not  watching  out  for  their 
dog.  When  you  come  to  a  street  crossing,  look  and  see  if  any  car  is  coming; 
stop  a  second,  see  that  your  dog  is  behind  you  and  that  it  stops;  then,  if 
the  coast  is  clear  say  "All  right,  come  on,  Jack!"  Your  dog  can  soon  be 
taught  to  follow  and  mind  you.  The  writer  has  for  years  past  taken  out 
from  fifteen  to  twenty  dogs  at  a  time  every  afternoon  for  a  walk  on  the 
streets  of  Cincinnati,  and  all  under  such  control  that  by  the  crack  of  a  whip 
they  would  all  stop  at  a  crossing,  and  a  second  crack  and  say  "Go!"  over 
they  flew,  and  enjoyed  it,  too.  With  only  one  dog  for  a  walk  no  danger  need 
ever  befall  him  if  you  are  watching  out  for  him  as  you  should  do. 

If  your  dog  gets  into  the  bad  habit  of  running  and  barking  at  a  horse, 
bicycle  or  a  person,  break  him  of  this  at  once  by  calling  him  to  you  there 
and  then;  scold  him  and  switch  him  sharply  over  his  back — any  dog  can 
soon  be  broken  of  this  by  proper  punishment  at  the  time,  or  of  any  fault 
if  he  is  punished  and  knows  what  it  is  for.  Whipping  a  dog  after  the 
fault  does  no  good  and  is  only  an  unnecessary  infliction.  Whipping  is  not 
necessarily  cruelty  any  more  than  it  would  be  to  punish  your  child  when 
it  needed  it,  and  children  need  it  oftener  than  dogs  do.  Get  a  rawhide,  keep 
it  handy,  and  when  your  dog  needs  it  give  him  a  few  sharp  cuts  across  the 
rump  or  back,  which  will  smart  and  sting,  and  he'll  remember  it.  Never 
strike  him  over  the  head  or  kick  him,  which  is  brutal.  Don't  get  angry 
yourself,  keep  cool,  for  the  dog  can  notice  this  the  same  as  your  child  could, 
and  the  punishment  loses  its  effect.  Your  dog  loves  you  from  the  first  hour 
you  have  him,  and  he'll  love  you  none  the  less  for  a  deserved  punishment. 

Whipping  is  not  necessary  with  all  dogs,  scolding  answering  the  pur- 
pose in  many  cases.  Dogs  possess  so  much  intelligence  that  a  good  scolding, 
especially  in  older  ones,  will  do  just  as  well,  and  I  consider  it  preferable. 
I  have  dogs  now  that  act  heart-broken  when  I  scold  them  and  continue  so 
till  I  again  talk  to  them  and  "make  up"  by  saying,  "Don't  you  know,  Jack, 
that  you  were  a  very  bad  dog?"  and.  "Now  if  you'll  be  good  I'll  forgive  you, 


but  you  mustn't  do  so  any  more."     Then  see  how  happy  Jack  is  and  how  he'll 
jump  all  over  you  for  joy. 

You  can  reason  with  all  dogs.  The  "punishment  should  fit  the  crime," 
and  therefore  use  judgment.  When  your  dog  deserves  praise,  don't  be 
stingy  about  giving  it,  but  talk  to  him;  he'll  understand  your  words  and 
oaresses,  and  by  his  actions,  the  loving  looks  from  his  eyes  and  the  wag  of 
his  tail,  he'll  show  you  how  much  he  appreciates  it. 

As  to  giving  sulphur  to  dogs,  this  is  an  old  tradition  handed  down 
from  no  one  knows  where,  and  here  is  where  many  dog  owners  make  a 
mistake.  If  your  dog  gets  sick  your  neighbor  will  say:  "Oh,  give  it  some 
sulphur."  Whoever  invented  this  idea  knew  very  little  about  dogs.  Sul- 
phur in  its  place  is  all  right,  but  a  continual  use  of  it  to  excess  thins  the 
blood,  weakens  the  dog,  and  does  harm  far  more  than  good.  Many  a  poor 
dog  has  been  overdosed  with  sulphur  when  it  did  not  need  it  at  all.  I've 
heard  of  people  keeping  a  lump  of  sulphur  in  the  dog's  drinking  pan,  and 
in  this  case  it  did  no  harm  nor  any  good,  for  you  can  leave  a  lump  of  it 
in  water  for  ten  years  and  the  dog  never  gets  any  of  it,  because  sulphur  and 
water  do  not  mix,  and  it  only  serves  to  give  the  water  a  nasty  taste  in  the 
imagination  of  the  dog.  Sulphur  given  about  once  a  month  in  summer  is 
all  right  for  grown  dogs;  the  proper  dose  being  for  large  breeds,  a  good 
teaspoonful  of  flour  of  sulphur  smoothly  mixed  in  milk,  to  be  given  before 
breakfast;  an  even  teaspoonful  for  smaller  breeds.  It  can  also  be  given 
mixed  up  in  molasses,  which  will,  however,  act  more  quickly  as  a  physic. 

If  you  live  in  a  flat,  or  have  no  yard  so  the  dog  can  get  grass,  you  can 
plant  some  grass  seed  in  a  box  and  have  it  all  the  year  around  for  your  dog 
to  eat.  Get  the  seed  of  the  kind  of  grass  that  dogs  like — any  seed  store 
has  it — and  you  can  just  as  well  raise  and  keep  grass  for  your  dog  as  you 
can  raise  flowers  indoors.  Keep  box  sitting  on  floor  so  dog  can  go  to  it  when 
he  wants  to.     You  provide  the  grass,  and  he'll  do  the  rest. 

This  preface  or  introductory,  is  about  all  I  can  say — it  seems  to  me  it 
has  covered  the  subject,  but  read  all  the  rest  in  the  book,  under  the  several 
headings,  so  you  don't  miss  anything  of  all  the  good  things  this  book  con- 
tains. 

So  I'll  close,  by  dedicating  the  book  to  dogs,  and  their  owners. 

Faithfully  yours, 

AL.  G.  EBERHART. 


CARD. 

This  Book 


I  AM  A  VERY   BUSY  MAN  IN  DOGS. 
My  mail  is  heavy   and  my   time  valuable. 

Should  contain — as  I  have  tried  to  make  it — all 


necessary  information  and  which  I  hope  you  will 
find  in  it,  by  a  careful  perusal — but  if  you  don't  so  find  and  deem  it  necessary 
to  write  me  as  to  any  special  case,  such  letters  must  be  accompanied  by  an 
enclosure  of  One  Dollar  to  receive  attention.  This  course  is  rendered  neces- 
sary to  justify  me  for  time  spent.  You  SHOULD  find  in  the  book,  advice 
and  treatment  for  every  case  of  a  sick  dog — and  I  hope  you  will — if  not, 
then  write. 

AL.  G.  EBERHART. 


EVERYTHING  ABOUT  DOGS 


DISEASES 

Administering  Medicine. — It  is  foolish  to  force  medicine  down  a  dog's 
throat  if  he  can  be  "tricked"  into  taking  it  naturally,  without  even  being 
aware  that  he  is  doing  so.  Even  when  force  is  necessary  there  is  no  need 
for  opening  a  dog's  teeth  when  liquid  is  to  be  given,  for  if  poured  into  the 
patient's  cheek  it  will  drain  through  the  teeth.  When  a  dog  refuses  to  swal- 
low whatever  is  placed  in  his  mouth — as  he  is  liable  to  do — all  that  is  neces- 
sary is  to  hold  his  head  up  and  close  his  nostrils  and  jaws  for  a  couple  of 
seconds. 

Giving  pills  to  some  dogs  is  a  more  difficult  matter.  Hold  the  dog's 
head  well  up,  open  mouth  with  your  left  hand,  and  place  the  pill  well  down 
his  throat  on  the  base  of  the  tongue,  quickly  close  his  jaws  for  a  second 
and  slightly  chuck  your  hand  or  finger  agaist  his  throat  and  he  is  bound 
to  make  a  gulp  and  swallow  it.  Some  dogs  are  very  cute  and  will  keep  the 
pill  inside  or  on  one  side  and  when  you  are  not  looking  will  quickly  spit 
it  out,  so  watch  them  for  a  minute  or  so  to  be  sure  the  pill  has  gone  down. 
Pills  can  also  be  given  hid  in  a  piece  of  meat  (providing  the  dog  is  not  so 
sick  that  he  has  refused  food),  but  if  you  give  them  pills  this  way,  fool 
the  dog  by  giving  him  first  a  few  pieces  of  meat  one  at  a  time,  having  your 
prepared  piece  handy  when  he  will  not  suspect  and  will  take  it,  following 
it  up  with  a  few  more  pieces  of  meat. 

A  great  many  dogs  will  take — when  not  too  sick — castor  oil,  cod  liver 
oil,  syrup  of  phosphates,  and  many  powders  even,  in  a  little  savory  broth  or 
porridge.  When  powders  are  refused  in  food,  mix  them  in  a  little  butter, 
honey  or  syrup,  and  place  well  back  on  the  tongue.  With  large  and  pow- 
erful dogs  the  mouth  can  be  held  open  by  twisting  a  towel  around  the 
upper  jaw,  and  an  assistant  is  generally  necessary  except  with  small  toy 
dogs,  which  can  be  held  tightly  between  the  knees  while  giving  the  med- 
icine. As  soon  as  the  medicine  is  placed  on  the  tongue,  close  the  mouth 
and  hold  it  shut  till  dog  is  seen  to  swallow,  but  must  not  be  held  so  as  to 
interfere  with  his  breathing  through  the  nostrils.  The  best  way  to  give 
liquid  medicine  is  to  gently  raise  the  dog's  head  and  form  a  pouch  or  pocket 
by  drawing  outwards  -and  slightly  upwards  the  lower  lip  at  the  corner  of 
the  mouth,  and  gradually  pouring  into  the  funnel  thus  formed. 

Gelatine  capsuls  are  very  handy  in  administering  powders.  If  the 
dose  is  bulky  it  is  better  to  divide  it  up  among  several  small  capsules  than 
it  is  to  try  to  inclose  it  in  a  single  large  one.  Powders  are  also  adminis- 
tered by  mixing  with  butter,  syrup  or  glycerine. 

Injections. — Use  a  rubber  syringe,  never  a  glass  one,  as  they  are  dan- 
gerous.    A  bulb  syringe  with  a  flexible  tube  two  or  three  inches  long  I  find 


10  DISEASES 

the  best,  as  you  can  so  handily  hold  the  bulb  in  your  hand  and  work  it 
quickly  when  ready  before  the  dog  can  get  out  of  position.  The  regular 
fountain  syringe  is  also  very  good.  For  injection  in  the  ear  there  is  a 
regular  ear  syringe  made. 

Following  was  published  in  Field  and  Fanoy,  and  is  very  good: 


MEDICINES  AND   THEIR  ADMINISTRATION. 

"There  is  nothing  analogous  between  the  dog  and  the  horse.  The  vet- 
erinarian who  treats  a  dog  from  an  equine  standpoint  is  a  failure.  In  tem- 
perament and  nervous  organization  the  dog  resembles  man,  but  his  diges- 
tive organs  differ  so  radically  taht  medicine  does  not  act  on  each  alike.  As 
an  instance,  common  salt  has  no  particular  effect  upon  man.  On  the  dog, 
in  small  doses,  it  is  an  emetic;  in  large  doses,  a  poison.  Castor  oil  is  a 
mild  laxative  on  man;  on  the  dog  it  is  an  active  purge.  Epsom  salts  act 
only  mildly  on  man;  on  dogs  it  acts  violently,  producing  copious,  watery 
stools.  Aloes  and  rhubarb,  recognized  as  purgatives  on  man,  have  no 
particular  effect  o  ndogs,  and  so  with  numerous  other  drugs. 

"The  dog  is  particularly  susceptible  to  the  action  of  chloroform.  This 
is  on  account  of  the  irregular  heart  action  previously  mentioned.  His 
sensitive  nervous  system  responds  quickly  to  the  smallest  doses  of  strych- 
nine, and  a  minute  quanty  of  mercury  produces  profuse  salivation.  These 
drugs  should  only  be  administered  by  an  expert.  Opium  is  not  particu- 
larly dangerous  in  its  action  on  dogs. 

"Between  human  exclamations,  canine  howling,  coughing  and  gasping 
and  occasionally  biting,  the  dog  generally  escapes  without  the  medicine. 
Kindness  and  strategy  are  the  only  safe  methods  for  giving  medicine.  Aim 
to  get  the  dog  to  take  his  medicine  without  knowing  that  he  is  getting  it. 
This  can  be  accomplished  by  having  the  medicine  in  pill  form.  One  of 
the  pills  can  be  introduced  into  a  slit  made  in  a  small  cube  of  meat.  Disarm 
the  patient  of  suspicion  by  preparing  several  similar  cubes  of  meat  without 
the  pills.  Give  him  one  of  these.  He  may  examine  it,  but  finding  it  all 
right,  will  swallow  it.  Another  should  be  given  him.  If  he  swallows  it 
without  examination,  give  him  the  cube  containing  the  pill  and  it  will 
follow  its  predecessor.  Do  not  use  fluids  if  it  is  possible  to  avoid  them. 
Gelatine  capsuls  can  be  had  in  various  sizes  to  accommodate  all  drugs. 
It  is  better  to  give  two  small  capsules  than  one  large  one.  To  give  a 
capsule  have  an  attendant  take  a  small  dog  in  his  lap;  a  large  dog  should 
be  gently  backed  into  a  corner.  Stroke  the  dog's  head  and  face  gently; 
then  with  the  left  hand  held  over  the  head  just  in  front  of  the  eyes,  press 
the  lips  against  the  teeth  just  enough  to  cause  him  to  open  his  mouth. 
Moisten  the  capsule,  place  it  as  far  back  on  the  tongue  as  possible,  which 
can  be  inserted  well  down  the  throat  without  danger  to  either  the  dog  or 
the  physician.  Close  the  mouth  quickly  and  the  capsule  will  be  swallowed." 
The  following  was  published  in  the  Dog  Fancier,  written  by  their 
veterinarian,  Dr.  D.  H.  Hall,  and  is  worth  publishing,  containing  many  good 
ideas: 


DISEASES  11 

ADMINISTRATION    AND    APPLICATION    OF    REMEDIES    TO    CANINE 

PATIENTS. 

"In  the  treatment  of  dogs  or  other  domestic  animals  one  great  obstacle 
to  successful  medication  is  the  difficulty  often  encountered  in  the  adminis- 
tration of  remedies. 

Dogs  frequently  refuse  to  swallow  liquids  or  offer  such  strenuous  ob- 
jections that  a  portion  of  the  medicine  is  spilled  and  the  quantity  admin- 
istered becomes  merely  speculative.  Hence  it  is  not  advisable  to  use  liquid 
medicines  at  all  for  dogs  if  it  can  be  avoided. 

Hypodermic  injections  of  alkaloidal  "solutions  are  the  most  prompt,  effi- 
cient and  reliable  method  of  administration  we  have,  but  as  it  pre-supposes 
the  possession  of  a  hypodermic  syringe  the  plan  is  not  feasible  in  the  ma- 
jority of  instances. 

Other  methods  are  to  have  the  remedies  incorporated  in  tablet  or 
granule  form  or  given  in  gelatin  capsules.  For  ordinary  purposes  this  is 
the  most  convenient  method.  The  tablet  or  capsule  can  be  placed  toward 
the  back  of  the  tongue  and  readily  forced  back  with  the  finger  far  enough 
so  that  to  swallow  is  the  only  thing  the  patient  can  do. 

Always  treat  him  kindly  and  give  an  approbative  pat  on  the  head 
and  when  the  time  for  the  next  dose  arrives  he  will  be  ready  for  it. 

At  times  liquid  medicines  are  necessary,  especially  saline  laxatives,  and 
as  they  are  decidedly  of  unpleasant  taste  and  the  dose  necessarily  large  it 
is  frequently  quite  a  difficult  matter  to  convince  the  patient  that  it  is  "not 
bad  to  take."  Rochelle  salts  is  the  least  nauseating  of  the  saline  laxatives 
and  when  given  largely  diluted  with  water  its  action  is  increased  and  the 
taste  not  so   disagreeable. 

In  giving  liquids  place  the  patient  in  a  corner,  but  do  not  handle  rough- 
ly. Have  the  medicine  in  a  bottle  or  hard  rubber  syringe.  Take  hold  of 
the  fold  at  the  angle  of  the  mouth  and  pull  out  to  form  a  pouch,  then  pour 
in  a  small  quantity  at  a  time,  repeating  as  it  is  swallowed. 

A  dose  of  castor  oil  is  sometimes  required,  especially  to  supplement 
the  action  of  a  vermicide.  If  this  is  given  in  about  four  parts  of  milk 
the  taste  will  be  largely  disguised  and  the  administration  more  pleasantly 
effected. 

In  applying  lotions  to  the  eye  the  lids  can  be  separated  by  the  thumb 
and   finger  and   the   solution   dropped   in   from   a   medicine   dropper. 

When  the  nasal  passages  are  occluded  by  adherent  discharges,  appli- 
cations of  warm  water  and  steaming  will  be  of  benefit.  For  the  latter,  the 
patient  can  be  held  with  the  nose  over  a  vessel  containing  hot  water  (med- 
icated if  the  case  demands)  and  enclosing  head  and  vessel  with  a  towel. 
Care  must  be  taken  though  to  allow  sufficient  air. 

In  applying  remedies  to  the  ear  the  most  useful  implement  is  a  blunt, 
hard  rubber  syringe.  If,  however,  it  is  necessary  to  apply  dry  powder  a 
"blower"  will  be  found  of  great  service. 

In  treating  wounds  the  watchword  should  be  antisepsis,  but  in  the 
use  of  such  preparations  one  must  always  bear  in  mind  the  danger  that 
may  result  from  the  patient  licking  the  dressing.  Of  antiseptics  iodoform 
should   never   be   used    for   the   dog   except   in    minute   quantities,    owing   to 


12  DISEASES 

liability  of  absorption  and  poisoning.  In  applying  remedies  other  than 
per  orem  it  sometimes  becomes  necessary  to  restrain  the  patient  from  biting 
his  would-be  benefactor.  This  can  be  accomplished  by  tying  a  long  piece 
of  tape  tightly  around  the  paws,  having  the  knot  on  the  under  side.  Then 
carry  the  ends  back  of  the  ears  and  tie  again. 

In  the  application  of  unguents  to  the  skin  of  long-haired  dogs  time 
is  really  sometimes  saved  by  clipping.  The  skin  can  be  more  thoroughly 
cleansed  and  dried  and  the  remedy  more  evenly  applied  and  consequently 
better  results  obtained. 

In  the  writer's  experience,  no  appreciable  difference  could  ever  be 
observed  in  the  texture  or  color  of  the  hair  when  it  had  grown  out  again. 
The  clipping,  however,  should  not  be  resorted  to  except  in  obstinate  cases 
and  during  favorable  weather. 

Rectal  injections  are  frequently  indicated,  especially  in  house  dogs 
where  from  lack  of  exercise  and  irregular  habits  the  faeces  becomes  im- 
pacted. In  cases  of  collapse,  extreme  weakness  and  refusal  of  food  it 
sometimes  becomes  necessary  to  introduce  predigested  foods  and  medi- 
cines per  rectum.  The  ordinary  bulb  syringe  or  those  of  the  hard  rubber 
variety  can  be  used  for  this  purpose,  but  the  nozzle  must  not  be  pointed 
enough  to  injure  the  mucus  membrane  as  abrasions  of  the  latter  might 
prove  troublesome. 

In  connection  with  the  administration  of  medicine,  it  will  be  well  to 
remember  that  all  drugs  act  more  powerfully  on  an  empty  stomach  than 
when  it  holds  food,  either  liquid  or  solid.  Therefore,  powerful  remedies  and 
those  which  are  of  irritating  character,  such,  as  arsenic,  iron,  nux  vomica 
and  cod-liver  oil,  should  be  given  after  feeding,  so  that  they  will  mingle 
"with  the  food  and  be  absorbed  slowly.  Oil  can  be  administered  easily  if 
floated  on  milk.  Whisky,  alcohol  and  all  fluids  of  strong  taste  should  be 
freely  diluted  with  water  before  administering,  at  least  four  parts  of  water 
to  one  of  whisky. 

Asthma. — This  is  a  common  disease  and  a  most  distressing  complaint, 
its  victims  being  mostly  found  among  house  pets  and  toy  dogs  that  have 
been  overfed  with  a  too  rich  diet,  and  lack  of  exercise  as  well.  Almast  every 
toy  dog  so  improperly  cared  for  and  fed  will  develop  asthma  as  they  get 
along  in  years.  The  grossness  of  body  induces  and  fosters  it  and  often 
causes  as  well  a  kind  of  scurvy  mange,  the  coat  feeling  harsh  and  dry  with 
a  rough  and  dirty  look.  The  symptoms  are  distressing  paroxysms  of  cough- 
ing with  great  difficulty  in  breathing,  which  occur  frequently.  The  symp- 
toms exhibited  are  due  to 'thickening  of  the  mucus  lining  of  the  trachea  and 
bronchial  tubes  which  by  lessening  the  calibre  of  the  respiratory  tract  in- 
terferes with  the  act  of  breathing  which  is  attended  by  a  loud,  wheezing 
noise.  The  blood  is  imperfectly  aereated  and  the  visible  mucous  mem- 
branes congested  and  dark  in  color.  Pugs  and  aged  Spaniels  seem  pre- 
disposed to  asthmatic  troubles,  which,  while  not  usually  fatal,  do  not 
prove  amenable  to  treatment. 

An  important  feature  of  the  treatment  is  attention  to  the  diet,  which 
should  be  of  a  non-stimulating  character.  First  relieve  the  animal  by  giving 
the  following  antispasmotic  drops:  Compound  spirits  of  sulphuric  ether  and 
tincture  of  opium,  equal  parts,  which  keep  in  a  cool  place  and  well  corked. 


DISEASES  13 

The  dose  for  a  15-lb.  to  30-lb.  dog  would  be  a  small  teaspoonful  in  a  couple 
of  tablespoonfuls  of  gruel  o'r  milk.  This,  however,  only  relieves  and  does 
not  cure.  The  dog  must  now  have  frequent  doses  of  a  brisk  aperient,  and 
a  pill  of  the  following  prescription  will  be  found  very  beneficial  given  every 
night  for  a  while: 

Podophyllin    6    grains 

Compound  extract  of  colocynth 30  grains 

Powdered  rhubarb    4  8  grains 

Extract  of  henbane 36  grains 

Mix  and  divide  into  twenty-four  pills. 

Small  breeds  such  as  Pugs  or  Toy  Poodles  give  half  of  one  of  these 
pills. 

A  little  warm  broth  after  the  pill  will  assist  its  action.  Feed  rather 
oftener  than  you  do  your  well  dogs  but  in  small  quantities.  Make  dog  take 
more  exercise  every  day,  which  will  cause  him  to  more  readily  eat  coarser 
food.  The  chance  of  a  complete  cure  is  not  encouraging  in  a  confirmed  or 
chronic  case,  but  the  regular  use  of  the  following  pills  will  have  a  won- 
derful effect  in  counteracting  severe  paroxysms: 

Powdered   ipecacuanha    6   grains 

Powdered   opium    6   grains 

Compound  squill  pill 24   grains 

Powdered  gum  ammoniacum    24  grains 

Powdered   licorice    24   grains 

Powdered  rhubarb 12   grains 

Mix  and  make  into  twenty-four  pills. 

The  dose  for  a  15-lb.  to  40-lb.  dog,  one  pill  morning  and  night.  Small- 
er than  15-lbs.  half  a  pill. 

Whenever,  severe  fits  of  coughing  with  difficulty  of  breathing  occur, 
if  the  antispasmodic  drops  mentioned  in  first  article  are  not  handy,  chloro- 
dine  may  be  given  in  the  same  way  as  the  drops,  the  dose  being  from 
twenty  to  thirty  drops.  Much  relief  can  be  given  to  asthmatical  dogs  by 
confining  them  in  a  close  box  or  kennel  and  filling  it  with  the  smoke  of 
thorn  apple.  This  may  be  done  twice  a  day,  but  care  should  be  taken 
with  such  patients  that  they  are  not  exposed  to  any  sudden  change  of  tem- 
perature, whether  from  heat  or  cold,  or  the  reverse. 

Or,  in  place  of  this  during  acute  attacks  when  the  breathing  is  very 
labored,  relief  may  be  obtained  by  inhalations  of  the  fumes  of  burning 
tar,  resin  or  creosote. 

An  asthmatic  form  of  breathing  is  frequently  found  in  connection  with 
tumors  involving  the  respiratory  tract.  Such  cases  are  incurable  and  it  is 
the  most  merciful  procedure  to  put  the  animal  to  a  painless  death. 

Harry  W.  Lacy  has  the  following  to  say  as  to  asthma,  and  I  append  it 
also  for  the  benfit  it  may  do: 


14  DISEASES 

"Asthma  is  a  very  common  ailment  among  sporting  dogs,  and  is 
brought  on  by  repeated  exposure,  followed  by"  inattention.  If  the  simple 
duty  of  making  a  dog  comfortable  be  attended  to  at  the  close  of  each  day's 
work,  there  need  be  little  fear  of  anything  like  this  ensuing.  It  is  not 
actually  the  exposure  to  the  weather  that  causes  a  dog  to  have  lung  trou- 
ble, because  when  a  dog  is  out  exposed  he  is  constantly  on  the  move,  and 
the  circulation  keeps  up,  so  that  it  is  not  possible  for  him  to  contract  a 
chill;  but  the  chill  is  contracted  when  the  animal  returns  home  and  lies 
down  in  a  wet  condition.  Then  the  blood  ceases  to  circulate  as  rapidly 
as  during  exercise,  and  the  animal  becomes  shivery  and  a  cold  develops. 
This  repeated  a  few  times  more  or  less  will  end  in  a  cough,  and  asthma 
will  ensue. 

When  once  a  dog  has  suffered  from  an  attack  of  asthma  there  always 
remains  with  him  a  predisposition  to  a  renewal  of  the  trouble.  It  is  a  most 
distressing  complaint,  and  in  the  case  of  an  animal  like  the  dog,  which  leads, 
or  should  lead  an  active  outdoor  life,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  effect  a 
permanent  cure.  Asthma  differs  from  bronchitis  in  several  ways.  It  comes 
on  in  paroxysms,  which  gradually  get  worse  and  worse,  until  finally  the 
animal  is  suffocated.  The  treatment  usually  adopted  consists  in  placing  the 
animal  in  a  room  or  chamber  where  a  kettle  is  constantly  boiling,  so  that 
the  atmosphere  is  kept  continually  moist — as  moist  warmth  does  as  much 
good  as  anything  to  give  relief  in  such  cases.  As  regards  medicine,  some 
of  the  ordinary  cough  remedies  may  be  tried,  the  best  thing  perhaps  being 
mixtifre  of  oxymel  or  squill  and  glycerine,  in  equal  parts,  to  which  a  large 
paregoric  elixir  is  added.  The  dog  should  have  this  about  three  times  a 
day." 

Another  very  good  thing  to  do  in  connection  with  any  treatment  you  use 
is,  cut  up  an  onion  small  and  fine,  anoint  with  a  drop  or  two  (no  more  or 
it  will  blister)    of  kerosene  is  excellent  for  asthma  and  bronchitis. 

This,  then  put  into  a  cotton  cloth  and  tied  around  the  dog's  neck  will 
afford  relief  in  breathing.     The  onion  should  be  renewed  by  a  fresh  one. 

House  dogs  suffer  greatly  from  over-indulgence,  errors  in  diet  and  lack 
of  exercise,  which  causes  them  to  put  on  flesh  rapidly.  These  conditions 
produce  derangements  of  the  heart,  lungs  and  circulatory  system  that  fre- 
quently result  in  a  morbid  condition  of  the  system,  known  as  asthma.  In- 
flammation of  the  mucous  membrane  lining  of  the  bronchial  tubes  also 
produces  this  disease,  so  that  colds  and  inhalations  of  noxious  gases  and 
vapors  are  common  causes. 

The  disease  is  easily  recognized  and  there  is  no  danger  of  confounding 
it  with  other  affections  of  the  chest.  It  is  not  liable  to  prove  fatal,  but 
seriously  affects  a  dog's  usefulness  and  will  unquestionably  shorten  the 
animal's  life. 

Symptoms:  The  patient  shows  great  distress  and  difficulty  in  breathing, 
particularly  after  slight  exertion,  and  suffers  more  or  less  from  suffocation. 
Respirations  are  not  increased  in  number,  but  are  labored  and  jerky  and 
have  a  wheezy,  croupy  sound  during  expiration.  There  is  generally  a 
peculiar  cough.  The  nostrils  are  dilated  and  the  expression  is  anxious  and 
pitiful.      The   coat   of   over-fed   dogs   suffering   from   asthma   is   rough    and 


DISEASES  15 

dirty  and  dry  and  harsh  to  the  touch.     The  skin   is  often  covered  with  a 
mangy-looking   scurf. 

Treatment:  A  radical  cure  of  this  disease  is  seldom  effected,  but  much 
can  be  done  to  improve  the  animal's  condition.  During  an  acute  attack 
of  the  disease  prompt  relief  will  be  afforded  by  giving  an  emetic  of  ten 
to  twenty  grains  of  sulphate  of  zinc,  or  thirty  grains  of  ipecac.  The 
bowels  should  be  kept  open  with  cascara  sagrada  or  olive  oil. 

Much  relief  can  be  afforded  to  dogs  suffering  from  the  spasmodic 
form  of  the  disease  by  confining  them  in  a  small  rocm  and  burning  on  a 
pan  of  coals  one  ounce  of  stramonium  leaves  and  a  drachm  of  nitrate  of 
potassa. 

The  following  prescription  can  then  be  used  with  good  results:  Potassa, 
iodidi  two  drams,  spirits  ammonia  arom.  one  ounce,  tincture  quassiae  and 
aquae,  of  each,  two  ounces.     Dose,  one  teaspoonful  three  times  a  day. 

Give  the  patient  slow  walking  exercise,  restrict  the  diet,  prevent  the 
accumulation  of  flesh  as  much  as  possible  and  aim  to  secure  the  best  physi- 
cal  condition   possible. 

Apoplexy — See    Fits. 

Abscess. — Pus  or  matter  forming  in  or  among  the  tissues  is  abscess. 
It  may  be  due  to  a  blow,  an  accident,  or  caused  by  locil  or  general  in- 
flammation. A  bitch  may,  after  whelping,  have  one  of  the  teats  dammed 
up,  which  gives  rise  to  lacol  inflammation,  which  would  end  in  abscess. 
There  is  unusual  heat  of  the  parts  while  the  abscess  is  forming;  a  hard 
lump  at  first,  but  as  the  matter  forms  this  becomes  softer,  and  is  movable 
under  pressure  of  the  hand.  Should  it  form  very  slowly,  hasten  its  forma- 
tion by  hot  fomentations,  which  must  be  used  continually  for  some  time, 
and  afterwards  cover  the  parts  to  prevent  reaction  from  cold  air.  If  you 
can  keep  a  poultice  on  the  part  this  is  very  useful.  Get  from  your  druggist 
a  piece  of  spongia  piline,  satuate  it  with  warm  water  and  apply  with  the 
waterproof  side  out.  When  the  under  part  of  the  abscess  is  soft  and  moves 
readily  under  pressure,  it  is  ready  for  opening.  To  open  it  take  the  lancet 
between  finger  and  thumb  and  plunge  it  well  into  the  center,  making  a 
clean  downward  cut  to  insure  good  drainage;  press  out  the  matter,  bathe 
with  warm  water  and  keep  it  clean,  which,  in  most  cases,  will  be  kept  so 
by  the  dog's  tongue  if  on  part  of  body  where  he  can  reach  it.  If  not,  then 
apply  Peroxyde  of  Hydrogen  three  or  four  times  a  day. 

In  cases  where  the  abscess  is  deep-seated,  the  veterinary  surgeon  alone 
should  use  the  knife.  A  light  and  nutritious  diet  should  be  given,  and  in 
many  cases  no  medicine  is  required,,  but  a  mild  purge  can  be  given  when 
it  is  forming.  Should  dog  be  much  reduced  and  his  appetite  impaired  after 
an  abscess  a  short  treatment-of  Sergeant's  or  Clayton's  Condition  Pills  will 
do  al  ot  of  good.  Abscesses  forming  :"n  lung  disease  would  discharge  the 
matter  through  the  nose,  also  be  coughed  up,  while  in  the  uterus  it  would 
be  by  the  vagina.  Other  internal  organs  may  be  the  seat  of  abscesses,  but 
none  of  these  cases  can  be  treated  by  the  amateur,  but  should  be  intrusted 
to  the  veterinary  surgeon. 


16  DISEASES 

PERI-RECTAL  ABSCESS. 

In  a  large  number  of  cases — in  fact  nearly  every  one — of  distemper, 
rectal  abscesses  will  be  found.  To  those  who  do  not  clearly  understand  the 
best  method  of  handling  them,  we  make  the"  following  suggestions: 

Take  the  dog  carefully  between  the  knees  and  bend  the  tail  sharply 
upward.  This  will  cause  the  rectum  to  project.  With  the  thumb  and  finger 
press  firmly  upon  the  projection,  as  if  to  extract  the  milk  from  a  cow's 
teat.  Use  considefable  force.  If  there  is  an  abscess,  this  will  break  it  and 
press  out  the  pus.  Be  careful  that  the  pus  does  not  fly  into  the  eyes. 
Repeat  this  operation  every  day  so  long  as  there  is  pus.  You  will  find 
this  is  a  material  aid  in  effecting  a  cure. 

Abortion. — Strictly  speaking,  abortion  means  the  expulsion  of  the 
foetus  before  it  is  sufficiently  matured  for  independent  life,  but  applied  to 
the  lower  animals  it  is  generally  used  to  mean  premature  parturition  as 
well.  Abortion  is  comparatively  rare  in  dogs,  but  premature  whelping, 
especially  just  a  week  or  so  before  the  pups  are  due,  is  by  no  means  un- 
common. The  causes  of  abortion  and  premature  parturition  are  various.  A 
low  diet,  causing  extreme  paverty  when  the  system  requires  extra  support 
for  the  growth  of  the  unborn  pups,  and  the  secretion  of  milk  for  them 
afterwards,  is  likely  to  cause  it;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  a  plethoric  state 
of  the  body  from  over-feeding  and  want  of  exercise  is  also  a  likely  cause, 
and  very  severe  exercise,  jumping  from  a  height  or  over  fences,  and,  what 
is  too  common,  blows  or  kicks  on  the  abdomen.  It  may  also  be  brought 
on  by  drinking  foul  water,  eating  putrid  food  or  anything  likely  to  cause 
inflammation  of  the  bowels,  violent  diarrhea,  and  consequent  straining. 
Young  bitches  bred  from  before  the  system  is  matured,  and  old  worn-out 
ones,  are  most  likely  to  abort.  Preventive  measures  consist  in  general 
attention  to  health,  both  in  regard  to  the  food  and  water  given  and  the 
sanitary  condition  of  the  kennel,  and  the  permitting  of  regular,  but  not 
violent,  exercise,  and  in  selecting  only  for  breeding  purposes  bitches  that 
are  matured  and  in  vigorous  health.  When  a  bitch  has  had  her  pups 
before  the  full  time  she  should  not  be  again  bred  from  until  at  least  one 
period  of  oestrum  has  passed. 

Anaemia  (Poverty  of  Blood)  is  shown  by  paleness  of  the  mucous 
membranes,  weak  and  slow  pulse  and  heart-beat,  lack  of  energy,  depression 
and  lassitude.  As  the  disease  progresses,  the  eye  sinks,  becoming  dull,  the 
gait  is  staggering,  the  breathing  becomes  labored  and  wheezy,  and  the  dog 
gradually  sinks. 

The  causes  are  poor  food,  exhaustive  demands  on  stud  dogs,  excessive 
secretion  of  milk,  and  allowing  bitches  to  suckle  puppies  too  long.  Anaemia 
may  also  be  the  result  of  some  other  disease  impoverishing  the  system, 
and  it  is  not  infrequently  a  consequence  of  the  dog  harboring  worms.  Give 
in  small  quantities  and  frequently  the  most  nourishing  foods — milk,  flesh, 
broths,  etc. — pepsin  porci  to  assist  digestion,  and  wine  of  iron  or  syrup  of 
phosphates  as  a  tonic.  Sergeant's  Clayton's,  or  Eberhart's  condition  pills 
are  a  good  tonic.  At  the  same  time  see  that  the  dog  is  warmly  housed 
and  that  he  gets  plenty  of  sunlight  and  fresh  air. 


DISEASES  17 

Asphyxia. — Inability  to  breathe  as  the  result  of  nearly  drowning.  In 
treating  never  attempt  to  make  dog  swallow  while  in  an  unconscious  state; 
inject  stimulants  under  the  skin,  such  as  from  ten  'to  twenty  drops  of 
brandy.  Dash  hot  and  cold  water  over  the  head  alternately  and  make  the 
attempt  of  artificial  respiration  as  follows,  when  due  to  partial  drowning: 
Hold  the  dog  up  with  his  head  downward  for  a  minute,  so  as  to  allow  the 
water  to  run  out  of  his  lungs,  then  place  the  dog  on  his  back,  draw  the 
tongue  out,  and  with  the  hand  placed  on  the  lower  part  of  the  chest  where 
the  latter  meets  the  abdomen,  press  downwards  and  forwards  with  some 
little  force,  then  suddenly  raise  the  hand  to  allow  the  chest  to  expand. 
This  should  be  repeated  every  three  or  four  seconds. 

Bladder,  Inflammation  of  the. — The  symptoms  are  great  pain  on  pres- 
sure over  the  region  of  the  bladder;  the  urine  passed  is  scant  in  quantity 
but  at  frequent  intervals,  and  evidently  with  great  pain.  It  frequently  comes 
from  a  blow  but  is  also  produced  by  long  exposure  to  cold  or  wet,  and  often 
the  result  of  giving  too  much  cantharides  and  turpentine.  Sometimes  due 
to  stricture  of  the  urethra  (urinary  passage)  or  calculi  (stone).  The 
treatment  consists  of  first  giving  a  brisk  purgative,  and  should  this  not  act 
it  should  be  assisted  by  clysters  of  luke-warm  water  or  thin  gruel,  or  a 
hot  bath.  The  acute  symptoms  having  passed,  give  3  gr.  to  5  gr.  of  benzoic 
acid  in  pill  form  three  times  a  day.  If  the  urine  is  not  freely  passed  the 
catheter  should  be  used  in  the  manner  detailed  under  heading  of  Paralysis 
of  the  Bladder.  When  the  bowels  have  been  opened,  give  a  dose  every 
six  hours  of  the  following  "fever  mixture." 

Powdered   nitre    1    dram 

Sweet  spirit  of  nitre 1'2    ounce 

Mindererus    spirit    1  "2    ounce 

Wine    of   antimony    1    dram 

Tincture  of  digitalis    y2    dram 

Water    4   ounces 

Mix.     Dose  for  a  dog,  25-lb.  to   30-lb.  weight,   one  tablespoonful  every 

four  hours  in  a  little  gruel.     Smaller  dogs  not  quite  so  much.     From 
50-lbs.  up  a  tablespoonful  and  a  half  as  a  dose. 
• 

The  patient  will  experience  relief  of  the  parts  are  bathed  continuously 
with  a  warm  infusion  of  poppy-heads,  or  warm  water  alone,  care  being 
taken  that  he  is  not  afterward  exposed  to  cold.  The  clog's  diet  should  be 
light  and  nourishing. 

Bladder,  Paralysis  of This  affection  is  shown  by  the  constant  efforts 

of  the  dog  to  urinate  and  inability  to  do  so,  the  water  coming  away  in 
dribbles.  It  may  arise  from  stone  in  the  bladder.  A  common  cause  is  over- 
distension of  the  bladder  caused  by  keeping  dogs  where  they  will  not 
urinate.  Some  dogs  will  not  do  so  when  shut  up  in  a  room,  or  when  on 
the  chain;  hence  the  necessity,  too  often  neglected,  of  taking  dogs  off  the 
benches  at  exhibitions  at  regular  intervals.  This  compulsory  retention  of 
urine  produces  spasm  of  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  and  paralysis — loss  of  the 


18  DISEASES 

necessary  muscular  power — follows.  It  may  also  be  the  result  of  injury  to 
the  spine,  or  of  debilitating  disease.  The  effect  of  continued  hot  fomen- 
tations should  be  tried,  and  if  these  -fail,  the  urine  should  be  drawn  off  by 
means  of  a  catheter.  Passing  a  catheter  is  a  very  simple  matter.  The 
dog  should  be  placed  upon  his  back,  and  the  prepuce  pressed  back,  so  as  to 
bring  the  penis  into  view;  the  catketer  should  then  be  dressed  with  a  little 
olive  oil  or  vaseline  and  passed  gently  into  the  opening  at  the  point  of  the 
penis.  This  will  introduce  it  into  the  bladder,  when  the  piece  of  wire  with 
which  the  instrument  is  provided  should  be  withdrawn.  Should  the  urine 
not  flow  freely,  the  dog  can  be  stood  upon  its  legs,  keeping  the  catheter 
in  position.  If  a  catheter  is  not  at  hand,  pressure  with  both  hands  through 
the  abdominal  walls  in  the  region  of  the  bladder,  will  empty  it  of  its  con- 
tents. If  paralysis  of  the  hind  legs  is  present,  an  assistant  should  raise 
the  body  from  the  ground,  by  means  of  the  tail,  whilst  the  operator  is  press- 
ing the  sides. 

During  convalescence  give  barley-water  to  drink,  and  soft  nourishing 
food — porridge  and  milk,  broth  and  bread,  etc. 

The  following  on  this  subject,  is  valuable:  This  disease  occurs  some- 
times from  keeping  dogs  of  very  clean  habits  shut  up,  with  no  opportunity 
to  relieve  themselves.  The  bladder  becomes  overdistended,  paralyzing  the 
parts.  It  may  also  be  the  result  of  a  general  paralysis  following  an  injury 
to  the  spine,  the  brain  or  some  part  of  the  nervous  system.  The  dog  at  first 
is  unable  to  pass  water  and  later  it  dribbles  from  him.  The  first  thing 
to  do  is  to  relieve  the  bladder.  If  there  is  no  mechanical  obstruction  this 
can  be  done  by  pressure  over  the  walls  of  the  abdomen.  If  this  fails,  a 
catheter  must  be  passed;  in  fact,  it  is  the  safest  thing  to  do,  for  when  an 
attempt  is  made  to  empty  he  bladder  by  applying  force  from  the  outsir.e 
there  is  danger  of  rupturing  the  parts.  The  catheter  for  a  small  dog 
should  be  No.  00,  for  terriers  No.  1,  for  setters  and  pointers  No.  2.  In 
the  event  of  a  small  gravel  lodging  in  the  passage,  it  is  usually  removed 
by  carefully  passing  a  small  grooved  silver  probe.  To  tone  up  the  bladder, 
nux  vomica  is  the  mast  useful  drug.  The  dose  is  from  one  to  seven  drops 
of  the  tincture  three  times  a  day  in  a  teaspoonful  of  water  given  "after  feed- 
ing. 

Bleeding  From  the  Stomach The  vomiting  of  blood  is  not  of  ordinary 

occurrence  and  may  be  the  result  of  many  causes.  If  due  to  a  recent. in- 
jury or  breaking  down  of  the  tissues,  it  will  be  bright  red  in  color,  if  the 
blood  is  coming  from  the  vens  it  will  be  of  darker  hue,  and  if  it  has  re- 
mained in  the  stomach  some  time  it  will  be  of  coffee  color.  In  treating  give 
the  stomach  at  least  twenty-four  hours'  rest  or  feed  only  milk  and  water, 
and  every  three  hours  give  from  a  teaspoonful  to  a  tablespoonful  of  the 
following:  Tincture  thalaspi  twenty-four  drops,  liquor  bismuth  one-half 
ounce.     Water  to  make  three  ounces. 

BOILS. 

These  are  similar  to  the  boils  in  human  beings  and  are  due  to  the 
same  causes,  that  is,  they  indicate  either  a  poverty  of  the  system  and  a  gen- 
eral weakness,  or  they  may  be  the  result  of  plethora  and  too  much  blood. 


DISEASES  19 

They  also  follow  diseases  like  distemper  and  are  not  uncommonly  induced 
by  worms.  Boils  are  very  painful  and  make  the  dog  cross.  They  appear, 
usually,  where  the  skin  is  thinnest.  Their  first  appearance  is  in  the  form 
of  small  red  swellings,  which  enlarge,  become  hot  and  painful  and  even- 
tually break  and  discharge  their  contents.  They  usually  appear  on  the 
inside  of  the  thighs  and  bellies  of  young  puppies  when  suffering  with  dis- 
temper or  worms.  If  accompanying  distemper  they  should  not  be  treated, 
but  at  other  times  the  proper  thing  to  do  is  to  reform  the  diet,  give  more 
green  food,  bathe  oftener,  exercise  more  and  when  the  boils  are  soft  and 
ripe  open  them  with  a  sharp  knife  and  dress  with  an  antiseptic  solution. 

Blood,  Poverty  of  the. — See  Anaemia. 

Bites. — A  great  injustice  is  done  to  a  great  many  dogs  by  the  old  say- 
ing that  "dogs  delight  to  bark  and  bite,"  for  there  are  very  many  that  do 
not  delight  in  either,  but  are  to  the  contrary,  properly  behaved  dogs  in  this 
respect.  Some  clogs  do,  however,  but  generally  in  self  defense,  or  at  sup- 
posed call  of  duty.  Should  your  dog  get  bitten,  wash  the  wound  with  tepid 
water,  press  out  any  blood,  and  pour  a  little  of  friar's  balsam,  or  compound 
tincture  of  myrh  on  it. 

Since  the  above  was  written,  I  was  bitten  on  the  left  hand  in  fourteen 
places,  by  a  Bulldog  I  was  showing  in  the  ring,  at  the  1916  dog  show  at 
Louisville,  Ky.,  State  Fair,  really  the  worst  chewing  up  I  ever  got.  Was 
taken  to  the  hospital  near  the  dog  show.  The  doctor  washed  the  hand, 
then  dressed  it  with  tincture  of  Iodine,  and  then  applied  a  healing  salve 
called  "Unguentine,"  (to  be  had  at  any  drug  store),  repeating  this  daily 
while  show  lasted,  and  I  done  the  same  for  a  week  after  home.  The  hand 
wrapped  with  cotton  and  bandage,  and  the  result  was  my  hand  got  entirely 
well.  I  will  just  mention,  however,  that  the  poor  dog,  after  home,  as  at 
the  show,  where  for  some  cause  he  suddenly  went  off  his  base,  continued 
here  to  be  crazy,  did  not  try  again  to  bite  me  (we  were  friends),  but 
did  bite  every  dog  he  got  at  here,  and  suddenly  died  three  days  later, 
being  buried  by  me  in  my  back  yard,  under  an  apple  tree — and  I  miss 
poor  "Wrinks."  I  find  that  many  doctors  now  use  tincture  of  Iodine, 
the  first  thing,  on  a  bite  or  wound,  in  place  of  cauterizing,  and  I  strongly 
advise  doing  so,  and  then  the  salve.  The  first  thing  to  do  if  you  are 
bitten,  is  to  suck  the  bite,  if  on  any  part  of  your  body  you  can  get  at  with 
your  mouth,  and  spit  this  out,  which  abstracts  any  poison — if  any  poison, 
from  the  bite.  Don't  be  afraid  of  a  dog's  bite,  don't  get  scared,  the  only 
danger  is,  a  small  percentage  of  blood  poison  setting  in,  but  if  your  own 
blood  is  in  good  condition  there  is  no  danger.  "Wrinks"  case,  with  almost 
every  veterinarian,  would  have  been  a  sure  case  of  rabies,  but  as  I  don't 
believe  in  this,  I  am  yet  here  writing  this  article. 

Instead  of  cauterizing  a  bite,  which  always  makes  a  nasty  looking 
wound,  I  much  prefer  to  use  the  tincture  of  Iodine  (using  a  small  brush), 
or  if  this  is  not  on  hand,  then  apply  Peroxyde  of  Hydrogen,  which  will 
do  all  the  cauterizing  will  do. 

Should  your  dog  be  bitten  by  a  strange  dog  and  any  suspicion  exists  of 
so-called  rabies  in   the  strange   dog,   immediately  use   the   tincture  of  Iron, 


20  DISEASES 

or  Peroxyde  of  Hydrogen,  and  isolate  the  dog  until  the  time  has  passed 
for  any  fear  of  hydrophobia  developing.  This  advice  is  given  to  those 
who  believe  in  the  so-termed  hydrophobia,  and  you  are  referred  now  to 
Rabies,  where  I  give  fully  my  own  belief  on  this  subject,  as  well  as  the 
ideas  of  others.  In  case  there  is  a  tear,  it  may  be  necessary  to  bandage 
or  draw  together  with  a  few  stitches  of  silk  thread. 

Bowels,  Inflammation  of  (Enteritis;  Peritonitis). — This  is  so  ably 
treated  by  Dalziel,  and  by  experience  I  know  it  to  be  good,  that  I  here  re- 
produce his  article  in  full.  The  best  plan,  however,  is  to  at  once  send  for 
a  veterinarian,  providing  you  have  one  who  understands  or  has  made  a 
specialty  of  treating  dogs — anyhow,  get  the  best  one  in  your  locality  and 
don't  stop  to  think  of  what  it  will  cost,  for  you  owe  it  to  your  dog  to  help 
him  out  of  his  trouble  if  such  a  thing  is  possible: 

"The  severity  and  very  dangerous  charcter  of  this  disease  in  the  dog 
is  such  that  perhaps  the  very  best  advice  that  can  be  given  to  the  amateur 
who  finds  his  valuable  dog  attacked  by  it  is,  send  for  a  qualified  veterinary 
surgeon  without  delay.  The  owner  may,  however,  he  possessed  of  sufficient 
self-confidence  as  to  wish  to  try  his  own  skill  in  treating  the  disease,  or 
the  animal  may  not  be  considered  of  sufficient  value  to  incure  the  expense 
of  employing  a  professional  man,  although  there  may  be  every  desire  to 
save  the  animal's  life;  and  if  I  can  help  in  any  such  commendable  endeavor 
without  encouraging  useless  and  ignorant  experiments  at  the  cost  of  torture 
to  the  dog,  I  shall  feel  that  I  have  been  of  some  little  service.  Whatever 
course  is  determined  on,  whether  home  treatment  or  the  calling  in  of  pro- 
fessional aid,  the  decision  should  not  be  taken  till  the  symptoms  have  been 
carefully  and  minutely  observed,  and  the  greatest  attention  must  be  paid 
to  them,  else  there  is  every  fear  of  the  amateur  confounding  it  with  and 
treating  it  as  colic,  a  disease  which,  although  strongly  resembling  inflamma- 
tion in  some  of  its  symptoms,  differs  widely  in  others,  and  requires  totally 
different  treatment.  Colic,  if  neglected  or  if  wrongly  treated,  may,  and 
frequently  does,  end  in  inflammation,  but  it  is  in  itself  a  distinct  ailment, 
and  the  same  remark  equally  applies  to  constipation  or  obstruction  of  the 
bowels.  As  inflammation  of  the  bowels  or  enteritis  is  one  of  the  most  fatal 
diseases  to  which  the  dog  is  liable — frequently  carrying  him  off  very  quick- 
ly— no  half  measures  will  do  for  it;  but,  having  ascertained  clearly  from 
the  prevailing  symptoms  that  the  disease  is  actually  present,  remedial  meas- 
ures must  be  adopted  with  promptitude  and  energy.  The  main  causes  of  the 
disease  are  irregular  or  improper  diet,  or  it  may  be  irritation  caused  by  the 
dog  having  swallowed  some  hard  indegestible  substance;  exposure  to  cold 
and  wet  may  produce  it,  and  it  is  sometimes  the  result  of  ill-usage,  such  as 
a  kick. 

"Inflamation  of  the  bowels  may  be  distinguished  from  colic  in  being 
more  gradual  in  its  approach,  and  is  always  ushered  in  by  general  feverish- 
ness;  the  nose  is  hot  and  dry,  the  eyes  red  and  inflamed,  and  the  whole 
countenance  is  expressive  of  great  anxiety;  shivering  fits  occur,  the  belly  is 
hard  and  distended,  and  in  the  surface  hot  to  the  touch;  the  urine  is  gener- 
ally scanty  and  high  colored.  As  in  colic,  when  standing,  the  back  is  arched, 
the  feet  are  drawn  in  toward  each  other,  and  the  tail  is  tightly  tucked  be- 


DISEASES  21 

tween  the  legs,  or  the  clog  may  steal  into  a  quiet  corner,  stretch  his  legs 
out  before  and  behind,  and  crouch  with  his  belly  on  the  ground,  probably 
finding  temporary  relief  by  bringing  it  in  contact  with  the  cold  floor  or 
ground;  the  dOg  may,  at  the  same  time,  be  observed  to  frequently  turn  an 
anxious  face  toward  his  flanks. 

"Another  safe  and  pretty  certain  way  of  distinguishing  between  enteri- 
tis and  simple  obstruction  or  colic  is  by  pressing  the  hand  along  the  belly; 
in  the  latter  disease,  especially  colic,  the  rubbing  gives  relief,  whereas  in 
inflammation  it  evidently  causes  acute  pain;   the  cry  of  pain  given  by  the 
dog  in  this  disease  is  shorter  and  sharper  than  the  rather  prolonged  howl 
in  colic,  but  to  distinguish  by  this  symptom  would  require  finer  discrimi- 
nation  than   can   be  reasonably   expected    from   the   comparatively   inexper- 
ienced, for  whom  I  presume  to  write.     I  may  here  mention  the  fact  that 
enteritis  is  very  commonly  a   complication  of  that   'scorge  of   the  kennel/ 
distemper,   and   this   fact  alone   sufficiently   shows   the   folly   of  trusting    to- 
any  single  medicine,  pill,  powder,  potion,  or  any  so-called  specific  whatever 
for  the  cure  of  that  disease.     The  treatment  proper  in   the  disease  under' 
consideration  consists  in  getting  the  bowels  relieved  as  speedily  as  possi- 
ble by  the  mildest  means   that  can  be  used,   constipation   being   generally 
present;  for  this  purpose  the  use  of  clysters  every  fifteen  minutes,  as  recom- 
mended  in   obstruction   of  the  bowels,   should   be  resorted   to,   and   the  in- 
jections must  be  used  gently  and  with  as  little  fuss  and  annoyance  to  the 
patient  as  possible.     When  the  clysters  begin  to  take  effect,  the  evacuation 
of   the  bowels   should   be  assisted   by  a   dose   of   castor   oil.      From   six   to 
twelve  leeches,   according  to  the  size  and   strength   of  the  dog,   should   be 
applied   to   the   belly,   and    after   they   have   filled   themselves   the   bleeding 
from  the  bites  may  be  encouraged  by  bathing  the  whole  surrounding  parts 
freely   and   continuously   with   warm   water.      Many   of-  the   best   writers   on 
dogs  recommend   giving  calomel  and  opium   combined,   and   it  may  appear- 
presumptuous  in  me  to  offer  a  contrary  opinion,  but  experientia  docet.     I 
have  given  calomel  to  dogs  in  this  disease  and  many  others,  but  I  do  not 
think   I   ever   once   gave   it  without   making   the   patient  worse;    so   I   have 
long  discarded  it,  in  the  firm  belief  that  it  is  not  a  medicine  at  all  suited 
to  the  dog,  and  I  am  quite  certain  from  my  own  experience,  and  feel  sure 
the  best  veterinarians  will   bear  me  out,   that  the  abusive   use  of  calomel 
and   other   forms   of  mercury,   given   too   often   in   immense   and   poisonous 
doses  to  the  dog,  by  country-  farriers  and  others  ignorant  of  its  properties, 
and    who    work    by    the    rule    of    thumb,    is    not    infrequently    the    cause    of 
inflammation   of   the  bowels.      Instead  of  calomel,   I  have  in   several   cases 
used  the  following  with  excellent  effect: 

Take  true  James'   Powder 3   grains 

Powdered  Opium 14    grain 

In    one   ppwder.      Give    every    two   hours    till    three   are   given;    large- 
sized  dogs  require  double  that  dose. 

"If  happily  the  dog  gets  over  the  attack,  with  signs  of  returning  health 
great  weakness  will  be  evident,  and  this  must  be  met  by  good  nursing  and 
a  generous,  but  easily  assimilated,   diet.     Beef  tea,  thickened,   with  bread, 


22  DISEASES 

rice,  etc.,  will  answer  well.  The  diet  must  be  so  varied  as  to  keep  the 
bowels  open  without  the  use  of  medicine." 

When  well  on  the  road  to  health  great  progress  will  be  accelerated  by 
giving  Eberhart's  Tonic  Pills  for  twenty  to  thirty  days.  They  contain  no 
"dope,"  (unlike  many  others),  make  the  dog  eat,  and  get  him  back  to 
health,  flesh,  and  spirits. 

To  allay  the  pain,  give  5  gr.  to  10  gr.  of  chloral,  with  5  to  30  drops 
of  tincture  of  opium;   also  apply  hot  flannels  to  the  abdomen. 

The  following  treatise  on  this  trouble  was  written  especially  for  this 
book  by  Dent,  and  I  consider  it,  also,  very  valuable: 

"An  affection  of  the  small  intestines.  This  disease  is  of  the  most 
dangerous  character  and  unfortunately  prevalent.  It  will  carry  off  a  dog 
in  a  few  hours,  and  in  its  treatment  there  is  always  danger  of  its  being 
confounded  with  common  colic,  which  is,  as  a  rule,  not  fatal.  The  diseases 
can   be   distinguished   from   each   other   as   follows: 

Colic  comes  on  quickly  and  is  relieved  by  rubbing  the  stomach — the 
pain  is  more  intense  and  spasmodic. 

Enteritis  comes  on  more  slowly  with  greater  general  depression,  the 
pain  is  continuous  and  is  increased  by  rubbing  the  stomach. 

Causes. — The  common  cause  of  inflammation  of  the  small  intestines 
is  the  feeding  of  an  improper  diet,  the  indigestible  substances  setting  up 
an  irritation  that  inflames  the  delicate  lining  of  the  bowels.  Cold,  ex- 
posure, wet,  blows,  kicks,  or  anything  that  will  injure  the  small  intestines. 
The  parts  affected  in  this  disease  are  also  causes.  This  disease  is  also  a 
common  complication  of  distemper. 

Symptoms. — This  disease  is  always  ushered  in  by  feverishness,  the 
eyes  are  red  and  swollen,  nose  hot  and  dry,  mouth  sticky,  the  belly  is  hard, 
tense  and  hot  to  the  touch,  the  patient  has  frequent  shivering  fits,  and  the 
countenance  is  most  expressive  of  pain  and  anxiety.  The  animal  will  steal 
away  into  some  corner  and  stretch  itself  out  on  the  floor  so  as  to  bring 
the  belly  next  to  the  cool  floor  or  ground,  and  in  this  way  may  be  relieved, 
turning  his  head  every  few  moments  and  look  at  its  flanks.  When  stand- 
ing the  tail  is  tucked  between  its  legs,  all  four  feet  are  drawn  in  toward 
each  other,  and  the  back  is  arched. 

Treatment. — Warm  comfortable  quarters  are  of  the  first  importance, 
and  a  thick  woolen  jacket  carefully  padded  and  adjusted  over  the  belly, 
chest  and  flanks  will  protect  the  parts  and  give  relief.  In  all  stages  of 
the  disease  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  the  bowels  be  relieved  of 
their  irritating  contents. 

Give  injections  of  lukewarm  water  and  castile  soap — or  thin  oatmeal 
water  containing  one  ounce  of  glycerine — until  the  lower  bowels  are  emp- 
tied. 

Then  give  a  dose  of  olive  oil  and  castor  oil,  in  equal  parts,  to  which 
can  be  added  from  10  to  20  drops  of  laudanum  for  each  ounce  of  the  oils, 
so  as  to  relieve  the  pain. 

One  ounce  of  this  combination  of  oils  can  be  given  as  a  dose  to  a  40-lb. 
dog.     Smaller  dogs  less  in  proportion  to  size. 


DISEASES  23 

"After  the  bowels  have  been  opened  to  further  allay  the  pain  give  to  a 
40-lb.  dog  from  5  to  10  grains  of  chloral  with  from  5  to  30  drops  of  the 
tincture  of  opium,  as  often  as  necessary.  The  diet  and  feeding  must  be 
carefully  looked  to.  The  food  must  be  soft,  semi-liquid,  bland  and  unir- 
ritating,  fed  only  a  small  quantity  at  a  time,  and  three  grains  of  pepsin 
given  after  each  meal. 

"Drink  must  be  allowed  only  in  very  small  quantities.  Milk  with  the 
addition  of  lime  water  is  excellent.  If  there  is  a  tendency  to  vomit  give  the 
subnitrate  of  bismuth  in  5  to  10  grain  doses,  three  times  a  day.  When 
the  dog  begins  to  recover  from  the  disease  the  proportion  of  solid  food 
can  be  increased,  and  a  good  tonic  condition  pill  will  facilitate  convales- 
cence and  build  up  the  patient." 

Eberhart's  tonic  pills,  or  Clayton's,  or  Sergeant's  condition  pills,  would 
new  be  of  great  benefit,  used  for  a  few  weeks. 

Back  Stiffness Usually  the  result  of  old  age,  chronic  rheumatism  or 

lumbago,  but  sometimes  the  result  of  sprains,  a  blow  or  other  injury,  such  as 
bt  ing  run  over  across  the  back.  The  patient  in  most  cases  walks  with 
difficulty  or  may  start  out  all  right  and  in  the  best  of  spirits,  but  before 
going  far  begins  to  lag,  loses  its  spirits  and  drops  its  tail.  In  most  cases 
there  is  pain  evidenced  upon  pressure  being  applied  to  the  back.  In 
other  cases  the  patent  can  walk  very  well,  but  is  unable  to  jump.  Treat- 
ment consists  of  absolute  rest  and  the  use  of  a  good  liniment,  the  follow- 
ing being  recommended:  Tincture  of  hyoscyamus  one-half  ounce,  chloroform 
one-half  ounce,  spirits  of  camphor  one  ounce,  soap  liniment  one  ounce. 
The  parts  should  be  massaged  and  this  liniment  applied  with  gentle  friction 
twice  a  day.  It  is  also  advisable  to  give  a  dose  of  aperient  medicine  and 
tu   feed  on  a  light  diet. 

Bad  Breath.- — This  disgusting  condition  is  due  to  a  variety  of  causes, 
chief  among  them  being  a  disordered  stomach,  the  result  of  worms  or  in- 
digestion, and  a  diseased  condition  of  the  teeth,  which  is  more  or  less 
dependent  upon  the  condition  of  the  stomach.  Diseases  of  the  lungs,  as 
well  as  a  catarrhal  condition  of  the  nasal  passages,  also  affect  the  breath. 
Remove  the  cause;  that  is,  if  the  stomach  is  out  of  order  treat  for  worms 
and  use  a  good  condition  pill  until  the  digestive  processes  are  normal.  If 
the  teeth  are  covered  with  tartar  remove  it  by  scaling  with  a  small  scraper, 
such  as  dentists  use,  and  then  clean  with  an  ordinary  tooth  brush  and 
dental  powder.  If  the  breath  remains  bad  after  the  teeth  have  been  cleaned 
and  the  stomach  toned  up,  give  twice  a  day  for  a  week  two  to  ten  grains  of 
salol.  If  there  is  a  catarrhal  discharge  from  the  nostrils  add  a  teaspoon- 
ful  of  salt  to  a  ten-ounce  bottle  of  water  and  syringe  out  the  nostrils  twice 
a  day  with  the  solution. 

Balanatis. — This  disease  is  not  of  common  occurrence  and  consists 
of  a  purulent  discharge  from  the  prepuce.  In  treating,  the  general  health 
should  be  given  attention  and  the  diet  carefully  regulated.  Cleanliness  of 
surroundings  is  also  important.  Feed  good  dog  cakes,  with  milk,  and  little 
or  no  meat.     Internally  give  Fowler's  solution  of  arsenic  in  doses  of  from 


24  DISEASES 

two  to  fifteen  drops  three  times  a  day  after  feeding.  Cleanse  the  parts 
with  tepid  water,  which  should  he  injected  into  the  prepuce  with  a  syringe, 
and  then  syringe  out  the  prepuce  with  a  solution  of  nitrate  of  silver  one 
grain  to  the  ounce  of  water,  or  use  a  saturated  solution  of  boracic  acid. 
In  some  severe  cases  the  base  of  the  penis  is  diseased,  and  it  should  be 
exposed  and  painted  with  a  four  per  cent  solution  of  nitrate  of  silver  twice 
a  week. 

Bruises Where  there  is   much   swelling,   bathe  with   warm   water  for 

an  hour,  dry  well  and  rub  in  the  following: 

Liniment  for  Sprains,  Bruises,  Etc. — Take  equal  parts  of  spirits  of 
turpentine,  liquid  ammonia  (not  the  strongest),  laudanum  and  rape  oil.  Mix 
to  iorm  liniment.  If  skin  is  broken,  touch  the  wound  with  tincture  of  ben- 
zoin and  rub  the  liniment  all  around,  but  not  into  the  broken  skin. 

Burns  and  Scalds. — Mix  equal  parts  of  linseed  oil  and  lime  water  and 
apply  freely  as  soon  as  possible  after  the  accident.  A  severe  burn  or  scald 
is  sure  to  be  a  blemish  for  life,  and  if  severe  often  gives  a  violent  shock 
to  the  system,  and  symptoms  of  illness  arising  from  it  should  be  observed 
and  treated  according  to  circumstances.  Apply  the  above  oil  direct  to 
the  wound  alone,  and  at  once  cover  thickly  with  cotton  wool  to  exclude 
the  air  from  the  bladders  formed.  On  removing  the  dressing  prick  the 
bladders  with  a  needle,  smooth  them  down  gently,  re-apply  the  dressing, 
taking  care  that  no  hairs  are  left  on  the  sore  places. 

Burns. — May  be  due  to  contact  with  fire,  but  more  frequently  it  is 
boiling  water  that  has  caused  the  injury.  In  some  cases  the  skin  is 
scorched  and  the  hair  frizzled,  but  the  hair  roots  are  not  destroyed  and  a 
new  growth  soon  reappears.  In  other  cases  the  tissues  of  the  skin  are 
destroyed,  the  hair  roots  killed  and  a  large  blister  forms,  which,  usually, 
goes  through  a  stage  of  suppuration  and  then  heals,  leaving  a  smooth, 
white,  glistening  scar  on  which  the  hair  never  grows.  If  the  skin  is  only 
scorched  apply  three  or  four  times  a  day  the  common  lime  water  and  linseed 
oil  lotion,  composed  of  one  part  of  lime  water  to  two  parts  of  linseed  oil. 
This  relieves  the  pain,  protects  the  parts  from  the  air  and  in  a  few  days 
the  patient  is  all  right.  In  those  cases  where  the  skin  has  been  burned 
deeply  the  parts  should  be  coated  with  boracic  ointment.  After  the 
blister  breaks  there  is  nothing  better  than  boracic  ointment  to  apply  to 
the  raw  surfaces.  It  should  be  laid  on  thickly  and  protected  by  lint  or 
absorbent  cotton,  kept  in  place  by  a  bandage.  The  dressing  should  be 
repeated  three  times  a  day. 

Baldness — Smooth-coated  toy  dogs  are  often  seen  with  hardly  any 
coat.  Black  and  tan  toy  terriers  especially,  due  to  in-and-in  breeding.  It 
can  also  be  the  result  of. deficient  nutritive  functions  and  debility.  Rub 
the  bare  places  with  an  ointment  made  of — 

Tincture  Cantharides    2    drams 

Vaseline    .  .  : 3   ounces 

Quinine    2  y2    grains 


DISEASES  25 

This  is  a  good  hair  grower,  but  here  is  where  Eberhart's  Skin  Remedy 
will  surely  do  the  work;  never  failing  as  a  hair  grower.  Clayton's  will  do 
the  same  thing. 

"Blain — Is  a  name  given  to  a  vesicular  swelling  of  the  tongue  along 
the  sides  and  underneath.  It  comes  on  suddenly,  is  most  frequent  in  spring 
and  summer,  and  appears  to  be  epidemic,  many  cases  occurring  in  the 
same  neighborhood  at  the  same  time;  it  has  not  been  shown  to  be  contagious, 
and,  although  it  is  not  a  fatal  disease,  it  is  a  very  troublesome  one. 

"The  symptoms  appear  without  warning  and  apparently  without  cause. 
The  first  thing  generally  observed  is  a  considerable  increase  in  the  flow 
of  saliva,  which  dribbles  from  the  mouth.  The  breath  is  foetid,  and  on 
examination  the  tongue  will  be  found  considerably  swollen,  while  if  the 
disease  has  lasted  any  time  there  will  be  observed  large  livid  vesicles,  which 
rupture,  leaving  ulcers;  these  ultimately  assume  a  gangrenous  form  and 
discharge  foetid  matter  tinged  with  blood." 

The  above  description  of  Blain  (malignant  sore  mouth)  I  quote  from 
Dalziel. 

I  have  never  had  a  case  of  this  trouble,  which  is  not  often  found  in 
dogs.  The  following  was  written  on'  this  trouble  by  Dr.  C.  L.  Thulichum 
for  Forest  and  Stream,  and  it  is  through  their  courtesy  that  I  publish  it: 

"Causes  of  this  trouble  are  conjectural,  the  disease  is  most  prevalent 
in  the  spring  and  summer,  and  more  frequently  found  in  the  southern  than 
in  the  northern  latitudes.  I  do  not  -know  of  any  authority  who  assigns  any 
particular  cause  for  this  trouble,  and  although  I  can  not  say  with  any 
certainty  myself,  I  have,  however,  noted  the  following  conditions, 
and  they  may  be  supposable  causes,  but  I  do  not  wish  to  go  on  record 
as  asserting  that  they  are  the  actual  causes,  as  they  are  simply  deductions 
of  my  own. 

"I  was  located  in  the  South  in  practice  some  years  ago,  when  I  first 
saw  a  case  of  this  trouble  in  the  dog.  At  that  time  I  had  on  my  hands 
several  cases  of  anthrax  or  Texas  fever  in  cattle.  I  noted  that  whenever 
I  found  a  case  of  this  trouble  in  the  dog  I  could  also  by  inquiry  find  that 
in  the  neighborhood  some  one  had  not  long  before  lost  a  cow  from  the  cow 
disease,  as  they  called  it.  As  the  dogs  were  allowed,  in  that  section,  to 
run  at  large,  and  as  a  dog  is,  when  at  large,  more  or  less  of  a  scavenger,  I 
concluded  that  either  the  dog  affected  had  found  the  carcass  of  the  cow 
that  had  died  and  been  buried  and  dug  himself  up  a  meal  from  her,  or 
that  following  that  very  desirable  habit  that  most  dogs  are  possessed  of, 
rolling  in  carrion,  he  had  taken  a  roll  in  this  filth,  and  then  in  licking  him- 
self afterward,  had  thus  infected  his  mouth  with  the  disease.  This  as- 
sumption may  be  entirely  wrong,  but  I  give  it  for  what  it  is  worth  and  it 
is  the  most  common  sense  cause  that  I  can  give  for  the  disease  in  the  section 
in  which  I  met  it.  The  English  authorities  do  not  assign  any  cause,  simply 
saying  that  the  attack  often  begins  without  any  apparent  or  previous  illness, 
which  is  so;  the  attack  is  apparently  sudden,  your  dog  seems  well  today 
and ^ tomorrow  has  a  very  sore  mouth. 

"Symptoms. — Dog  may  be  a  little  listless  for  a  day  or  two,  which  may 
not  be  noticed.     Next  and  noticeable  symptom  is  that  he  wants  to  drink  a 


26  DISEASES 

great  deal  of  water  and  drools  saliva  from  the  corners  of  the  mouth; 
tongue  is  enlarged  and  thickened.  You  look  into  the  mouth  and  find  it 
covered  on  its  sides  and  under  surface  with  large  vesicles  of  a  red  or  livid 
color,  which  may  end  in  irregular  and  even  gangrenous  ulcers;  the  breath 
is  extremely  offensive  and  discharge  of  salvia  very  great;  dog  will  not  eat 
and  apparently  can  not  swallow,  but  this  is  a  mistake — he  can,  but  won't, 
owing  to  the  great  soreness  of  the  mouth.  If  the  disease  is  not  checked 
now  it  passes  on  to  the  bowels  and  the  dog  dies  with  severe  bloody  dis- 
charges. 

Treatment. — There  is  only  one  that  I  have  ever  found  necessary,  and  if 
you  get  at  the  dog  promptly  before  the  bowel  trouble  commences  I  believe 
you  will  affect  a  cure  in  every  case;  at  least  I  have. 

"G-et  an  ounce  of  the  tincture  of  sanquinaria  canadensis  at  your  drug- 
gist's and  a  camel's  hair  throat  pencil  or  swab  on  wire.  Paint  the  inside  of 
the  mouth  and  tongue  where  affected  with  this,  morning  and  night,  and 
give  a  tablet  of  bichloride  of  mercury,  one-hundredth  of  a  grain,  three 
times  a  day  internally.  Feed  nothing  but  milk  for  several  days  after 
cure  is  effected.  Buttermilk  is  one  of  the  finest  adjuncts  to  a  cure.  You 
watch  the  dog  closely  and  don't  give  him  too  much  water,  not  until  he 
suffers  from  the  lack  of  it,  but  so  that  he  will  be  thirsty  enough  to  drink  the 
buttermilk  when  you  hand  it  to  him.  Have  it  as  cold  as  possible  and  give 
him  a  soup  plate  full  three  times  a  day;  one  day  sweet  milk,  the  next  but- 
termilk. After  he  is  well,  feed  him  for  some  time  boiled  rice  and  milk  and 
buttermilk  and  bring  him  gradually  on  to  his  regular  feed. 

The  above  treatment  I  have  found  to  put  the  mouth  in  such  shape 
that  the  dog  will  take  nourishment  after  the  first  twenty-four  hours,  and 
after  that  he  will  steadily  improve,  and  four  or  five  days  sees  the  mouth 
entirely  healed  except  that  it  is  still  tender  to  solid  food.  To  a  dog  the 
size  of  a  setter  or  hound  you  can  give  as  high  as  a  fiftieth  of  a  grain  at  a 
dose  of  the  bichloride  of  mercury;  to  pups  and  smaller  breeds  one-hun- 
dredth of  a  grain  is  enough,  and  in  fact  I  confine  myself  to  this  dose  with 
all.  sized  dogs  under  St.  Bernards  or  mastiffs,  as  it  is  quite  as  effective  in 
the  smaller  dose  as  in  the  larger." 

Brain,  Inflammation  of  the  (Meningitis). — The  meingess,  the  mem- 
branes enveloping  the  brain,  are  liable  to  inflammation.  Symptoms  are 
great  drowsiness,  with  sudden  spasmodic  movements  of  the  muscles  of  the 
head  and  chest  during  sleep.  The  disease  is  often  produced  by  fits.  In  this 
and  other  brain  troubles  there  is  a  disposition  to  walk  in  circles,  always  to 
one  side,  and  the  sight  is  so  affected  that  the  dog  runs  against  obstacles. 
Treatment  by  the  amateur  is  of  no  avail;  call  in  a  good  veterinarian  or 
your  family  doctor. 

Blisters — See  general  remarks  under  heading  of  Medical  Terms. 

Boils. — This  term,  being  in  common  use,  is  well  understood.  Boils 
are  not  very  common  on  the  dog;  when  they  appear  a  poultice  of  some 
kind  should,  if  practicable,  be  kept  constantly  applied,  in  order  to  bring 
the  boil   quickly  to  a  head,  when   it  should   be  opened  with   a  lancet,   the 


DISEASES  2  7 

matter  well  squeezed  out  of  it,  the  part  well  washed  with  tepid  water,  and 
then  dressed  with  the  following  ointment:  Turner's  Cerate  (Ceratum  cala- 
mine), 1  oz.;  precipitated  chalk  and  glycerine,  and  carbolic  acid,  each  2 
dr.;  mixed.  If  bicarbonate  of  soda — dose,  ten  grains  for  a  30  lb.  dog — be 
given  three  times  a  day  it  will  check  the  tendency  to  form  boils.  Smaller 
toy  dogs  use  five-grain  doses,  large  breeds  fifteen-grain  doses. 

Blotch. — When  dogs  are  affected  with  blotch,  (Acute  Eczema),  in- 
flamed patches  are  observed  on  various  parts  of  the  body;  these  discharge 
thin  mattery  fluid,  which  forms  a  scab,  matting  the  hair  together,  which 
in  a  few  days  falls  off,  leaving  bare  patches  moist  from  the  exuded  fluid. 
These  will  appear  in  a  night,  and  need  cause  no  alarm  whatever.  Use  for 
a  few  days,  'till  the  spots  are  dried  up,  a  powder  of  equal  parts  of  Boric 
Acid,  bismuth  sub  nit,  and  oxide  of  zinc.  Dust  this  well  in  on  the  in- 
flamed patches  twice  a  day.  After  dried  up  then  use  Eberhart's  skin 
remedy  twice  a  day,  and  it  will  bring  the  hair  back  in  due  time. 

Here  is  a  good  lotion  that  you  can  have  made  if  you  haven't  my  skin 
remedy  on  hand: 

Lotion  for  Blotch. — Take  carbolic  acid  and  glycerine  (British  Phar- 
macopoeia), 1  oz.;  laudanum,  2  oz.;  water,  iy2  pts.;  carbonate  of  potash, 
2  drs.  It  should  be  applied  over  the  whole  surface  of  the  skin  affected 
twice   a    day. 

A  bath  or  two,  except  in  cold  weather,  will  facilitate  a  cure,  using 
Eberhart's,  or  some  good  dog  soap,  warm  water  to  which  add  a  teaspoonful 
of  carbonate  of  soda,  and  the  dog  afterwards  very  carefully  dried. 

Of  course,  the  kennel  must  be  examined,  any  defective  sanitary  arrange- 
ments altered,  and  thorough  cleanliness  insisted  on.  The  dog's  bedding 
should  be  changed  at  least  every  other  day,  and  the  proper  use  of  dis- 
infectants in  and  about  the  kennel  are  of  great  use. 

Breeding,  To  Prevent. — To  prevent  a  bitch  from  breeding  after  she 
has  gone  astray,  accidentally  been  bred,  wash  out  the  womb  with  a  strong 
solution  of  alum  and  water,  using  the  ordinary  syringe  with  the  female 
point  adjusted.  The  sooner  this  is  done  after  the  act  of  coition  the  better. 
It  will  often  prove  successful,  especially  if  the  bitch  is  in  the  early  stages 
of  oestrum.  A  fairly  strong  solution  of  Condy's  Fluid,  with  5  gr.  of  sul- 
phate of  zinc  to  each  ounce,  has  also  been  successfully  employed. 

Another,  and  very  sure  thing  I  have  found  is,  as  soon  as  they  are 
loose,  have  syringe  ready,  filled  with  pure  cider  vinegar,  say  half  a  tea- 
cup, hold  bitch's  hind  parts  up  and  inject  this  in  the  vagina.  The  super- 
matazoa  can  not  live  in  any  acid  solution.  The  injection  should  be  quickly 
done,  after  they  are  apart. 

Bronchocele. — This  is  an  enlargement  of  the  thyroid  glands,  the  prin- 
cipal cartilage  of  the  larynx.     See  Goitre. 

Bronchitis. — This  is  an  inflammation  of  the  bronchial  tubes  or  wind 
pipes  that  convey  the  air  to  the  lungs,  the  upper  portion  called  the  larynx. 
It  is  caused  by  exposure  to  damp  and  cold,  neglecting  a  common  cold,  of 


28  DISEASES 

being  kenneled  where  foul  emanations  are  breathed.  Excessive  barking, 
as  dogs  often  do  at  their  first  bench  show,  will  cause  a  slight  inflammation 
of  the  larynx.  When  the  larger  air  pipes  are  only  affected,  the  cough 
is  a  short,  dry,  intermittent  one  at  first,  but  in  a  few  days  it  becomes  more 
frequent  and  moist,  mucus  is  discharged  from  the  nose  and  coughed  up  as 
well.  When  the  smaller  brancnes  are  attacked  the  cough  is  more  severe, 
there  is  a  constant  wheezing,  and  frothy  matter  tinged  with  blood  is  ex- 
pectorated; the  breath  is  hot,  mouth  and  nose  dry  and  hot,  the  tongue 
is  parched,  the  pulse  is  weak  and  considerably  increased,  eyes  are  red 
and  inflamed,  the  discharge  from  the  nose  becoming  thick  and  copious,  and 
the  dog  suffers  from  violent  sneezing. 

Treatment. — Put  the  dog  in  a  room  tolerably  warm,  one  with  a  fire  in 
it  is  best,  where  a  tea-kettle  is  kept  boiling,  as  the  steam  thus  distributed 
throughout  the  room  is  very  beneficial,  but  ventilation  is  also  essential. 
A  room  with  a  fireplace  in  it  would  insure  this.  Give  the  dog  one  dose 
of  from  three  to  five  grains  of  true  James'  Powder.  As  a  mild  laxative, 
give  a  dose  of  castor  oil.  For  food,  give  broths  or  porridge,  with  -bits  of 
boiled  liver  added. 

Where  there  is  an  accumulation  of  phlegm,  and  the  animal  endeavors 
to  dislodge  it,  dive  a  dessertspoonful  to  a  tablespoonful  of  ipecacuanha 
wine  to  act  as  an  emetic.  This  will  greatly  relieve  the  patient.  If  the 
cough  is  troublesome,  give  from  a  dessertspoonful  to  a  tablespoonful  of  the 
following  twice  a  day: 

Liquor  morphise  mur    2   drams 

Spirit  of  ether  sulp.  co    2   drams 

Tincture  of  camphor  co 3   drams 

Ipecacuanha  wine    1   dram 

Water   to   make    3   ounces 

Or  3  gr.  to  5  gr.  of  benzoic  aid  will  relieve  the  cough.  Apply  hot  linseed 
poultices  to  the  chest  and  sides,  and  always  place  a  coat  upon  the  dog.  A 
woolen  cloth  or  blanket  will  do  for  this,  covering  his  chest  and  around  his 
body  two-thirds  towards  rear,  fastened  with  safety  pins. 

The  following  medicine,  in  the  form  of  a  thin  electuary,  should  then 
be  administered  to  the  patient   every  three   hours: 

Electuary  for  Bronchitis  and  Sore  Throat: 

Chlorate   of  potash    3  drams 

Wine   of  ipecacuanha    3  drams 

Tincture  of  opium 2  drams 

Powdered   licorice  root    %  ounce 

Powdered  gum  acacia    %  ounce 

Honey     1  ounce 

Vinegar  of  squills y2  ounce 

Mix  and  give  to  small  dogs,  up  to  2  5-lb.  weight,  half  a  teaspoonful 
every  three  hours,  and  to  large  dogs  a  teaspoonful  as  a  dose.     Shake  bottle 


DISEASES  29 

well  before  giving,  as  these  ingredients  have  a  tendency  to  separate.  It 
should  be  placed  well  back  on  the  tongue  and  should  be  swallowed  gradually. 
Is  is  sometimes  advisable  to  blister  the  throat  and  front  of  the  chest, 
and  in  most  cases  a  good  rubbing  with  a  strong  stimulative  liniment  will 
be  of  service.     Vinegar  and  mustard  may  be  used,  or  the  following  mixed: 

Spirits  of  turpentine 1  y2    ounce 

Oil  of  origanum    1   ounce 

Tincture  of  cantharides    \'2    ounce 

Spirit   of   hartshorn    1   ounce 

Rape    oil     2   ounces 

Bronchitis  often  assumes  a  chronic  form,  especially  in  old  dogs,  when 
the  cough  is  husky  and  constant,  retching  and  discharge  of  phlegm,  the 
breathing  short  and  thick,  and  the  dog  is  incapable  of  much  exertion. 
Chronic  cases  are  incurable,  but  alleviation  can  be  given  when  it  is  unusually 
bad  by  giving  a  desertspoonful  to  a  tablespoonful,  according  to  size  of  dog, 
of  equal  parts  of  oxymel  of  squills  and  thick  mucilage  of  acacia  several 
times  a   day. 

Another  veterinarian  advises  as  follows: 

"This  trouble  is  of  frequent  occurrence  and  is  due  to  an  inflammation 
of  the  air  passage  leading  down  into  the  body  of  the  lung,  and  may  be  the 
result  of  a  cold  or  chill  or  the  breathing  of  smoke  or  novious  vapors.  The 
symptoms  are  more  or  less  difficulty  in  breathing,  severe  and  constant 
coughing  and  the  accumulation  of  phlegm  in  the  windpipe.  In  bad  cases 
the  patient  will  not  lie  down,  but  sits  with  the  forelegs  braced  and  the 
chest  expanded.  In  treating  place  in  a  room  comfortably  warm  without 
being  overheated,  and  moisten  the  air  by  keeping  a  kettle  going.  If  the 
throat  is  so  full  of  phlegm  that  breathing  is  difficult  give  an  emetic  of  the 
wine  of  ipecac  in  doses  of  a  half  to  two  teaspoonfuls,  repeated  in  one 
hour,  if  necessary.  After  the  stomach  is  erupted  and  the  patient  has  quieted 
use  the  following  mixture:  Paragoric  six  drams,  Hoffman's  spirits  two 
drams,  ipecacuanha  wine  one  dram,  syrum  of  squills  one  ounce,  water  to 
make  three  ounces.  The  dose  is  a  teaspoonful  to  a  tablespoonful  every 
four  or  six  hours.  Keep  the  bowels  open  by  occasional  doses  of  aperient 
medicine  and  repeat  the  emetic  if  the  breathing  has  not  improved  in  forty- 
eight  hours,  and  after  the  acute  stage  of  the  disease  has  passed  and  the 
cough  is  better  give  cod  liver  oil  emulsion.  Feed  on  milk,,  meat  broths  and 
soup  during  the  early  stages  of  the  disease,  and  as  the  severe  symptoms 
abate  meat  may  be  given. 

Bronchitis    (Chronic   Husk) This   condition    is   the   result   of   a    more 

or  less  chronic  thickening  of  the  membranes  lining  the  air  passages,  so  that 
the  dog  is  in  apparent  good  health  with  the  exception  of  a  hard,  dry,  husky 
cough  that  is  brought  on  by  any  excitement  or  exertion,  and  is  usually 
worse  in  the  morning  and  at  night.     These  attacks  of  coughing  end  usually 


30  DISEASES 

in  a  retching  and  gagging,  as  if  vomiting  or  expelling  a  piece  of  phlegm 
from  the  throat.  Give  aperient  medicine  so  as  to  keep  the  bowels  open 
and  use  the  following  mixture:  Tincture  of  nux  vomica  thirty  drops,  syrup 
of  squills  one  ounce,  water  to  make  three  ounces;  dose  from  half  a  tea- 
spoonful  to  a  tablespoonful  three  times  a  day  after  feeding,  the  first  for 
a  toy,  the  second  for  a  St.  Bernard  or  one  of  the  larger  breeds.  If  the 
cough  is  very  severe  give  from  fifteen  drops  to  a  teaspoonful  of  glyco- 
heroin  in  water.  Feed  underdone  meat,  raw  eggs,  gelatine  or  any  easily 
digested  food  that  will  not  distend  the  stomach  unduly,  as  a  distension  of 
the  stomach  brings  pressure  on  the  chest  and  aggravates  the  condition." 

Bowels  (Intussusception). — This  trouble  is  of  more  frequent  occur- 
rence in  puppies  than  old  dogs.  It  is  the  result  of  the  bowel  telescoping 
upon  itself.  By  careful  manipulation  of  the  abdomen  it  can  be  located  by 
a  long,  hard  swelling.  The  patient  suffers  much  pain  and  usually  whines 
and  cries  pitifully.  The  other  symptoms  are  diarrhea,  with  blood-tinged 
mucus,  and  in  the  early  stages  vomiting.  Intussusception  is  due  to  a  variety 
of  causes,  such  as  worms,  indigestion  and  colic,  or  the  eating  of  hard 
substances,  but  as  indigestion,  colic  and  the  abnormal  appetite  that  causes 
dogs  to  eat  indigestible  and  irritating  matter  are  more  or  less  the  result 
of  the  presence  of  worms,  the  latter  must  be  accepted  as  the  primary 
cause.  The  importance  of  treating  for  them  frequently  is  therefore  ap- 
parent. In  treating  mild  cases  that  have  not  progressed  far  give  from 
one  to  five  drops  of  laudanum 'every  three  hours  in  a  teaspoonful  of  milk. 
One  drop  is  the  correct  dose  for  a  puppy  two  to  three  months  old  of  the 
toy  breeds  and  five  drops  is  the  dose  for  the  large  breeds  of  the  age  men- 
tioned. Feed  only  liquid  food — milk  or  beef  tea.  If  there  is  not  a  decided 
improvement  in  the  puppy's  condition  in  twenty-four  hours  an  operation 
should  be  resorted  to.  In  the  early  stages  it  is  nearly  always  successful 
and  the  puppy  receives  immediate  relief.  If  it  is  postponed  the  operation 
is  more  difficult,  on  account  of  the  inflammation,  and  the  bowels  cannot 
be  so  easily  straightened.  The  patient  should  fast  for  twenty-four  hours 
following  the  operation,  after  which  for  a  few  days  administer  only  liquids. 

Breasts  (Inflammation) . — This  painful  condition  usually  attacks  bitches 
while  nursing  their  puppies,  the  abscesses  that  are  liable  to  form  at  other 
times  being  generally  of  slower  growth  and  not  accompanied  by  systemic 
disturbance.  The  milk  gland  in  acute  cases  is  swollen,  hard  and  red  and 
very  painful,  and  the  elevation  of  temperature  indicates  the  formation  of 
pus.  After  two  or  three  days  the  swelling  becomes  softer,  comes  to  a 
point,  breaks  and  freely  discharges.  If  the  bitch  is  nursing  it  is  necessary 
usually  to  remove  the  puppies  and  feed  them  by  hand  or  turn  them 
over  to  a  foster-mother,  the  mother  meanwhile  being  milked  two  or  three 
times  a  day.  The  swellings  should  be  poulticed  with  flaxseed  until  they 
are  soft,  and  then  lanced.  As  a  rule  they  do  not  require  any  other  treat- 
ment, for  their  dependent  position  insures  free  drainage.  It  is  advisable 
to  keep  the  patient's  bowels  open  with  a  dose  of  aperient  medicine. 

Biliousness. — Symptoms  are  vomiting  in  the  morning  of  frothy  yellow 


DISEASES  31 

bile,  usually  after  eating  grass,  an  unusual  thirst,  sometimes  a  diarrhoea, 
refusal  of  food,  and  in  some  cases  the  eyes  and  mouth  and  skin  take  on 
a  yellow  cast.  For  treatment  first  give  a  dose  of  castor  oil,  so  as  to  keep 
the  bowels  open  and  remove  the  excess  of  bile.  If  there  is  much  nausea 
and  sickness  of  the  stomach  give  carbonate  of  bismuth.  A  dose  of  from 
two  to  twelve  grains  simply  should  be  placed  on  the  tongue  and  the  mouth 
held  for  a  moment  until  it  is  swallowed.  If  this  does  not  give  good  results 
use  the  following  prescription:  Diluted  hydrocyanic  acid  twenty  drops, 
liquor  bismuth  one  ounce,  water  to  make  six  ounces.  The  dose  is  from 
a  teaspoonful  to  a  tablespoonful  every  three  hours.  In  most  of  these 
cases  giving  the  stomach  a  complete  rest  will  do  more  good  than  anything 
in  the  way  of  drugs.  In  some  cases  good  results  follow  the  use  of  small 
doses  of  quinine  or  the  extract  of  taraxacum. 

Bed    Sores Large,    unhealthy-looking    sores    frequently    form    on    the 

hips,  points  of  the  buttocks,  shoulders  and  other  parts  of  dogs  which  have 
suffered  from  severe  illness.  Success  in  treatment  depends  upon  protect- 
ing the  parts  affected  from  further  injury.  First  clean  the  parts  with  a 
warm,  saturated  solution  of  boracic  acid,  then  dry  carefully  with  soft  linen 
rags  and  dust  with  powdered  boracic  acid  and  iodoform  in  equal  parts; 
encircle  the  injured  parts  with  a  ring  of  felt,  kept  in  position  with  adhesive 
tape. 

Bladder  (irritable). — These  cases  as  a  rule  require  the  attention  of 
a  veterinary,  as  the  irritation  may  be  set  up  by  a  variety  of  causes,  not 
the  least  of  which  is  a  stone  in  the  bladder.  The  common  symptom  of 
bladder  trouble  is  constant  straining,  even  when  indoors;  in  other  cases, 
not  so  bad,  there  is  frequent  micturition  of  high-colored,  cloudy,  strong- 
smelling  urine.  The  presence  of  blood,  as  a  rule,  is  an  indication  of  calcu- 
lus, or  stone.  Sometimes  the  blood  comes  mixed  with  the  urine,  and  in 
other  cases  it  comes  in  drops  after  the  passing  of  water.  In  those  cases 
where  the  stone  becomes  fixed  in  the  pasage,  and  the  dog  is  incapable  of 
micturition,  no  time  should  be  lost  in  calling  in  a  good  veterinary  sur- 
geon. If  there  is  not  much  pain  a  course  of  treatment  with  the  hyposul- 
phite of  soda  is  all  that  is  necessary,  the  dose  being  from  three  to  twenty 
grains,  diluted  in  water  and  administered  three  times  a  day  before  feeding. 
If  there  is  much  pain,  give  the  tincture  of  hyoscyamus  in  dose  of  from 
two  to  fifteen  drops  in  water  every  three  hours.  Feed  on  milk,  barley  wa- 
ter and  dog  cakes. 

Broken  Bones. — It  can  be  ascertained  that  a  bone  of  the  leg  is  broken 
by  taking  hold  of  the  limb  above  the  supposed  fracture  and  moving  the 
lower  portion  against  it,  when  a  grating  or  crackling  of  the  broken  ends 
against  each  other  will  be  felt  or  heard.  The  treatment  consists  in  ad- 
justing the  fractured  parts  to  their  natural  form,  and  applying  splints  to 
keep  the  parts  set.  Splints  may  be  made  of  strips  of  gutta  percha,  softened 
in  warm  water  and  moulded  to  fit  the  limb,  or  pieces  of  thin  wood  may  be 
cut  the  required  size  and  well  padded  with  wadding.  The  splints  can  be 
kept   in   place   by  binding   evenly  with   light   cotton   bandages,   which,   pre- 


32  DISEASES 

vious  to  application,  have  been  smeared  with  the  following  preparation 
whilst  warm:  Take  Venice  turpentine,  Burgundy  pitch,  equal  parts;  melt 
and  smear  over  the  bandage  whilst  hot.  If  much  swelling  occurs,  it  will 
be  necessary  to  slacken  the  bandages,  and,  in  most  cases,  it  will  be  requisite 
to  muzzle  the  dog  to  prevent  him  tearing  off  the  splints.  Perfect  rest  will 
be  required,  and  the  general  health  attended  to.  The  time  it  will  take 
for  the  bones  to  unite  is  uncertain,  but  always  tedious. 

Unless  you  feel  capable  of  handling  the  case  properly  yourself  you  had 
better  call  in  a  verterinarian  or  your  family  physician.  Your  druggist  could 
do  this  in  case  neither  the  veterinarian  or  doctor  could  be  had. 

Bowels,  Obstruction  of  the   (Constipation  or  Costiveness) Dogs  kept 

in  the  house  and  not  exercised  sufficiently,  or  improperly  fed,  are  particularly 
liable  to  constipation.  Bones,  while  excellent  and  almost  necessary  to  a 
dog's  health,  yet  an  excessive  use  of  them  is  to  be  avoided,  also  any  one 
kind  of  dry  food,  and  no  dog  should  be  kept  constantly  on  one  kind  of  food, 
as  want  of  exercise  and  the  absence  of  necessary  variety  in  the  food  are 
the  principal  causes  of  constipation. 

When  looked  upon  as  a  disease  itself,  or  as  a  symptom  and  attendant 
on  other  diseases,  it  is  always  troublesome  and  often  becomes  dangerous. 
The  feces  accumulate  and  get  pressed  into  hardened  lumps,  the  belly  is 
distended  and  hard,  the  colic  pains  occur,  driving  the  dog  almost  frantic 
and  causing  him  to  run  about  blindly,  stumbling  over  different  obstacles 
in  this  way,  and  to  give  utterance  every  now  and  the  nto  sharp  howls  of 
pain.  All  this  pain  and  misery  that  the  poor  dog  has  to  suffer  in  nearly 
every  case,  is  the  result  of  neglect  of  proper  rules  which  every  dog  owner 
should,  in  common  justice  to  the  dog,  be  acquainted  with  and  observe.  But 
the  evil  does  not  end  here,  for  it  is  the  too  common  practice  to  rush  into 
one  of  commission  quite  as  great  or  greater — namely,  the  common  practice 
in  constipation  of  resorting  to  strong  purgatives,  such  as  epsom  salts,  jalop, 
calomel,  etc.,  the  consequence  of  giving  which  is  to  render  the  evil  worse 
by  forcing  the  feces  into  still  less  compass  when  it  becomes  more  impacked 
and  hardened  than  before.  The  proper  course  to  follow  is,  when  the  dog 
is  in  great  pain,  administer  a  dose  of  the  anti-spasmodic  drops.  Compound 
spirits  of  sulphuric  ether  and  tincture  of  opium  (laudanum)  equal  parts. 
Mix  and  keep  in  a  well-stoppered  bottle  in  a  cool  place.  The  dose  for  a 
20-lb.  to  30-lb.  dog  would  be  a  small  teaspoonful  given  in  about  two 
tablespoonfuls  of  milk,  gruel  or  other  liquid.  Success  in  relieving  the  pa- 
tient is  best  obtained  by  mechanical  means.  Clysters  of  thin  oatmeal  gruel 
or  soap  and  water,  lukewarm,  and  containing  about  one  ounce  of  castor 
oil  in  each  half  pint,  must  be  used  continuously  for  some  time,  in  fact  till 
the  desired  object  has  been  attained.  This  end  will  be  greatly  facili- 
tated by  first  introducing  the  finger,  oiled,  into  the  rectum,  and  removing  as 
much  of  the  hard  lumps  of  feces  as  can  be  reached.  Assistance  will  also 
be  given  to  the  action  of  the  clysters  by  gently  pressing  or  kneading  the 
belly  at  intervals  with  the  hand.  It  is  necessary  that  everything  should 
be  done  with  the  greatest  gentleness;  boisterous  conduct  and  rough  hand- 
ling being  likely  to  alarm   the  patient  and   cause  him   to   do   himself  irre- 


DISEASES  33 

parable    injury-      When    the    lower    bowels    have    been    emptied    follow    it 
up  by  giving  the  dog  a  strong  dose  of  Podophyllin  pills: 

Podolphylln     6  grains 

Compound  extract  of  colocynth    30  grains 

Powdered    rhubarb    48  grains 

Extract  of  henbane 36  grains 

Mix  and  divide  into  twenty-four  pills.  The  dose  is  from  one-half  to 
two  pills,  according  to  age  and  size,  and  it  is  advisable  to  give  the  dog  a  little 
warm  broth  after  the  pill  to  assist  in  its  action. 

The  use  of  purgatives  must  not  be  resorted  to,  to  prevent  a  recurrence 
of  the  disease.  The  system  of  management  must  be  altered,  the  dog  must 
have  daily  exercise,  the  food  must  be  varied  and  embrace  a  portion  of 
boiled  green  vegetables  at  least  every  second  or  third  day.  For  a  week 
or  so  after  the  attack  rather  sloppy  food  should  be  given,  such  as  welf- 
boiled  porridge  and  milk,  or  broth,  and  an  occasional  meal  of  boiled  liver 
will  act  as  a  gentle  laxative. 

Worms  are  another  cause  of  obstruction  in  the  intestines,  especially  in 
puppies;  round  worms  get  coiled  into  balls,  set  up  local  irritation  and 
interfere  with  the  natural  action  of  the  bowels. 

BLACK  TONGUE. 

This  is  a  new  disease,  confined  so  far,  to  dogs  in  the  Southern  states. 
Personally,  I  have  never  seen  a  case  of  it,  and  do  not  pretend  to  try  to  ad- 
vise as  to  treatment.  The  following  was  written  by  the  late  Polk  Miller 
of  Richmond,  Va.,  (and  a  valued  friend  of  mine  he  was),  and  I  am  giving 
his  article  and  treatment,  due  to  the  great  confidence  I  felt  in  him  as  a 
gentleman  sportsman,  and  lover  of  dogs. 

BLACK  TONGUE   OR  THE   "NEW  DISEASE." 

There  is  a  new  disease  among  the  dogs  in  our  Southern  States,  and  in 
some  of  the  Northern  and  Western  States  (though  to  a  limited  extent), 
which  is  giving  great  trouble  and  anxiety  among  dog-owners.  I  say  new, 
because  it  has  appeared  in  the  last  ten  years.  It  is  called  "Black  Tongue" 
by  the  majority  of  people,  but  as  that  does  not  appear  in  all  cases,  it  is 
called  the  "New  Disease."  A  dog  which  is  perfectly  well  today  may  be 
extremely  ill  tomorrow,  'and  if  the  disease  is  not  arrested  in  twenty-four  to 
thirty-six  hours,  it  generally  proves  fatal.  A  close  watch  should  be  kept  to 
see  that  it  doesn't  get  too  good  a  start.  The  symptoms,  as  nearly  as  I 
can  describe  them,  are  as  follows:  General  languor,  dullness  about  the 
eyes,  little  or  no  appetite,  a  dryness  about  the  mouth  and  throat  (some- 
times swelling),  and  high  fever.  In  some  cases  the  glands  are  excited 
and  a  profuse  flow  of  saliva  is  noticed,  but  in  most  cases  the  tongue  is 
dry,  and  the  poor  brute  seems  anxious,  though  unable,  to  swallow  water, 
on  account  of  inability  to  lap  the  liquid.  These  are  some  of  the  most 
noticeable    symptoms,    and    the    dog    thus    affected    is    indisposed    to    notice 


34  DISEASES 

the  call  or  caresses  of  his  master,  and  manifests  a  disposition  to  roam 
about  in  a  listles  manner,  preferring  to  be  "severely  left  alone."  What- 
ever may  be  the  opinion  of  others  as  to  a  proper  treatment,  or  a  name  for 
this  disease,  it  is  my  belief,  from  personal  experience  with  it,  that  it 
should  be  treated  in  the  same  manner  as  our  old  physicians  treated  diph- 
theria in  human  beings  before  the  new  remedy — anti-toxin — was  discov- 
ered. I  give  that,  and  trust  that  the  lives  of  many  dogs  that  would  other- 
wise die  may  be  saved.  I  have  never  failed  to  cure  a  dog  by  the  prompt  use 
of  this  treatment  at  the  very  first  appearance  of  the  trouble,  and  I  have 
never  known  one  to  get  well  when  two  days  have  elapsed  before  the  rem- 
edy  was   applied: 

Chlorate  of  Potassium V2    ounce 

Mur.   Tine.   Iron    Vz    ounce 

Water     1   pint 

Sig. — Mix,  shake,  and  with  a  soft  rag  protruding  over  the  end  of  a 
stick,  dip  into  the  solution  and  thoroughly  mop  out  the  mouth  and  throat 
twice    daily,    for   two    days. 

The  following  was  written  by  someone  south,  who  seemed  to  know 
from  experience  as  to  Black  Tongue.  The  3  grain  dose  given  of  thymol,  was 
used  on  a  Foxhound,  probably  a  fifty  pound  dog,  therefore  exercise  judg- 
ment, (as  thymol  is  a  dangerous  drug),  for  smaller  dogs: 

"As  to  black  tongue,  I  use  the  thymol,  as  it  is  a  better,  antiseptic 
for  the  intestinal  tract,  and,  in  addition  to  this  I  use  alternately  a  wash  of 
permanganate  of  potash  and  a  saturated  watery  solution  of  alum.  I  give 
the  thymal  rubbed  up  with  pure  Castile  soap  and  put  into  capsules,  giving 
one  capsule  containing  three  grains  of  thymol  every  four  hours.  I  wash  the 
mouth  out  before  each  capsule  is  given,  alternating  with  the  two  solutions 
mentioned   above. 

As  the  dog  sick  with  black  tongue  will  not  eat,  as  a  rule,  I  drench 
him  with  milk  morning  and  night,  sometimes  adding  a  raw  egg  to  the 
milk. 

I  want  to  give  just  a  few  warnings  to  those  unfamiliar  with  the  use 
of  thymol.  Its  use  in  the  human  being  is  attended  with  a  certain  amount  of 
danger,  and  this  is  doubly  so  in  the  dog.  It  should  never  be  given  to  a 
dog  until  the  intestinal  tract  has  been  thoroughly  cleaned  out  with  salts. 
The  dog  should,  then  be  starved  for  at  least  twelve  hours  before  the  thy- 
mol is  administered,  and  this  should  be  followed  in  six  hours  with  another 
dose  of  salts.  The  dog  should  then  be  given  nothing  to  eat  for  several 
hours  more.  Under  no  circumstances  should  the  dog  be  allowed  any 
fat  for  several  hours  after  the  last  dose  of  salts  and  he  should  have 
nothing  whatever  to  eat  between  the  first  and  last  dose  of  salts. 

Several  fatal  cases  of  poisoning  are  on  record  from  the  use  of  thymol 
in  the  treatment  of  hookworm  in  the  human.  Chenopodium,  or  the  oil  of 
wormseed,  is  a  far  safer  drug  to  use.  In  addition  to  its  being  a  safer 
drug,  it  has  been  proven  that  it  effects  cures  of  hookworm  in  the  human 
where  thymol  has  been  given  and  has  failed.  In  the  Journal  of  the  Amer- 
ican   Medical    Association    of .  November    28,    1914,    Dr.    Robert    L.    Levy    of 


DISEASES  35 

Johns  Hopkins  Hospital  reports  two  cases  of  hookworm  treated  and  cured 
with  oil  of  wormseed  where  thymol  had  failed.  He  also  gives  the  'coeffi- 
cient of  efficacy'  in  the  same  percentage  as  the  article  you  have  quoted. 
He  gives  the  following  mode  of  administration:  First  day— Liquid  diet; 
8  p.  m.  one  ounce  Epsom  salts.  Second  day — Omit  .breakfast  and  lunch; 
at  5  a.  m.  one  ounce  of  Epsom  salts;  at  7,  9  and  11,  sixteen  drops  of  oil 
chenopodium  on  a  little  granulated  sugar;  1  p.  m.  one  ounce  castor  oil 
containing  fifty  minims  of  chloroform;  soft  supper  (this  for  a  dog  would 
be  a  little  baker's  bread  soaked  in   milk).      Third  day — Resume  full  diet." 

Another  southern   writer  has   this  to  say: 

"While  it  has  not  been  definitely  determined  whether  or  not  this  dis- 
ease is  due  to  hookworm  infestment,  indications  suggest  a  very  close  relation, 
as  postmortem  examinations  have  shown  hookworms  and  great  intestinal 
inflammation.  Ii  is  probable  that  the  toxin  which  the  hookworm  injects 
into  the  dog's  blood  may  cause  the  disease.  It  is  not  contagious,  nor 
can  it  be  communicated  by  feeding  or  drinking  from  the  same  vessel.  An 
experiment  was  recently  made  by  feeding  parts  of  stomach  and  intestines 
of  a  dog  which  died  of  an  acute  case  of  black  tongue  to  several  healthy 
dogs,  and  no  ill  effects  developed.  Another  fact  that  is  quite  apparent  is 
that  black  tongue  is  never  found  except  in  sections  of  the  country,  which 
includes  the  entire  South,  where  the  hookworm  is  known  to  exist"  As  to 
the  treatment  for  hookworms,  see  "Hookworms"  in  the  regular  worm 
article. 

Colic. — This  subject  is  very  completely  covered  by  Dalziel. 

"Nearly  all  domestic  animals  are  subject  to  attacks  of  colic,  or  pripes, 
as  it  is  more  frequently  termed,  especially  when  the  horse  is  the  subject 
of  the  disease.  In  the  dog,  puppies  are  especially  liable  to  it,  but  it  attacks 
dogs  of  all  ages,  and,  if  not  promptly  attended  to  and  properly  treated,  is 
very  liable  to  end  in  inflammation  of  the  bowels — a  most  dangerous  dis- 
ease, which,  in  some*  of  its  features,  though  happily  not  its  dangerous  ones, 
colic  resembles.  One  very  important  point  of  distinction  is,  that  whereas 
inflammation  comes  on  gradually,  and  feverishness,  with  hot,  dry  nose,  etc., 
always  exist  as  premonitory  symptoms,  colic  comes  on  suddenly,  and  a  dog 
eating  well  and  seeming  in  perfect  health  is  seized  with  spasm  of  the 
coat  of  the  bowels,  causing  such  pain  that  he  gives  voice  to  a  low  moan, 
which  is  afterward  changed  to  a  prolonged  howl,  as  the  paroxysms  of  pain 
increase  in  frequency  and  severity.  In  colic,  too,  the  nose  and  mouth  are 
cool,  and  there  is  no  offensive  breath.  As  in  inflammation,  the  attitude 
is  peculiar  and  unmistakable;  the  back  ebing  arched,  the  feet  drawn  in 
toward  each  other  and  the  tail  tightly  tucked  between  his  legs;  in  colic, 
the  belly  is  sometimes  distended  considerably  with  gas,  and  is  then  known 
as  flatulent  colic.  It  is  a  disease  of  frequent  occurrence  in  dogs,  and  the 
exciting  causes  are  various;  exposure  to  wet  and  cold;  getting  dogs,  espe- 
cially house  dogs,  to  swin  in  cold  inclement  weather,  are  common  causes; 
the  presence  of  worms  in  the  intestines  also  produces  colic.  But  the  most 
common    cause    is    undoubtedly    the    giving    of    improper    food;    sugar    and 


36  DISEASES 

other  sweet  things  are  likely  to  produce  it;  puppies  just  after  weaning 
are  very  liable  to  it,  especially  if  they  have  small  lumps  of  meat  or  other 
solid  food  thrown  to  them,  which  they  can  not  well  chew,  but  greedily 
bolt;  or  having  a  portion  of  one  meal  left  in  the  dish  till  the  next  meal 
is  added  is  very  likely  to  produce  it,  because  the  stale  portion  undergoes 
fermentation,  that  is,  becames  sour,  and  the  fermentation  is  carried  on  in 
the  stomach.  Colic  is  sure  to  yield  to  prompt  and  proper  measures,  and 
the  treatment  is  simple  and  safe.  As  soon  as  observed,  give  the  sufferer 
a  dose  of  "anti-spasmodic  drops."  Compound  spirits  of  sulphuric  ether 
(known  as  Hoffmans'  anodyne),  and  tincture  of  opium  (laudanum)  equal 
parts.  Mix,  and  keep  in  a  well  stoppered  bottle  in  a  cool  place.  Dose  for 
15-lb.  to  35-lb.  dog  would  be  a  small  teaspoonful  in  two  teaspoonfuls  of  milk 
or  gruel.  It  must  be  given  diluted  with  thin  gruel,  milk  or  water, 
and  if  immediate  relief  does  not  follow,  administer  a  double  quanitity,  as 
a  clyster  in  gruel,  or  the  dose  may  be  repeated  in  half  an  hour.  In  "flatulent 
colic,"  known  by  the  distended  belly  sounding  like  a  drum  when  tapped  with 
the*  end  of  the  finger,  from  10  to  30  drops  of  spirit  of  sal  volatile  may  be 
advantageously  added  to  dose  of  "anti-spasmodic  drops,"  or  the  following 
draught  may  be  given  and  repeated  in  an  hour  if  the  dog  is  not  relieved: 

Carbonate    of    soda 20   grains 

Aromatic  spirits   of  ammonia 30    drops 

Essence    of    ginger 5   drops 

Laudanum      15  drops 

Peppermint    water 2   tablespoonfuls 

This  is  a  dose  for  a  medium-sized  dog,  such  as  a  pointer  or  a  greyhound. 
For  puppies  and  smaller  breeds  use  less  of  this  as  the  dose.  After  the  attack 
has  subsided  give  the  dog  a  gentle  aperient,  such  as  the  "mild  purge": 

Syrup  of  buckthorn 3   parts 

Syrup  of  white  poppies 1   part 

Castor  oil 2   parts 

Dose  for  dog  15-lb.  to  30-lb.,  is  a  tablespoonful.     Bottle  must  be  well 
shaken   before  using.      Larger  dogs  a  little  more. 

Keep  on  a  laxative  diet,  and  do  not  let  the  dog  have  violent  exercise 
for  a  day  or  so.  Endeavor  to  discover  the  cause  of  the  attack  and  avoid  a 
repetition.  Lead  poisoning  produces  a  peculiar  form  of  colic,  and  clogs 
should  not  have  water  to  drink  that  has  been  collected  in  leaden  cisterns. 

The  using  of  one-eighth  grain  doses  of  morphine  hypodermically  every 
half  hour  or  hour  during  the  attack  of  colic  will  give  relief  very  soon. 

Ooryza  is  the  name  given  to  a  common  cold  when  confined  to  the  nose 
and  eyes,  and  a  running  at  the  nose  and  watery  eyes.  I  have  found  the 
following  plan  to  quickly  cure  it.  Take  a  large  sponge,  wring  it  out  of 
warm  water,  sprinkle  it  freely  with  vinegar  of  squills,  and  hold  it  to  the 
clogs  nose  so  that  he  inhales  the  fumes.  Or,  half  fill  an  upright  jar  or  jug 
of  suitable  size  with  bran,  saturate  it  with  hot  water,  and  sprinkle  over  and 


DISEASES  37 

stir  into  the  bran  the  following:  A  tablespoonful  of  ordinary  vinegar,  a 
teaspoonful  of  laudanum,  and  six  drops  of  glycerine,  and  carbolic  acid 
(British  Pharmacopoeia).  Mix,  and  hold  the  dog's  nose  over  it.  This 
quantity  is  a  double  handful  of  bran  in  a  quart,  or  three-pint  jar,  is  suitable 
for  a  20  to  50  pound  dog.  A  good  idea,  if  eyes  continue  to  run,  would  be 
to  use  the  eye  lotion  of  Hydrastes  and  Camphor  water,  which  you  will  find 
given   under   Eye    troubles. 

Claws,  Inflammation  at  the  Roots  of; — Dogs  used  to  the  chase,  or  hunt- 
ing in  scrubby  heather,  or  running  much  over  hard,  uneven  roads,  suffer 
from  s#re  toes;  the  parts  around  the  roots  of  the  claws  are  swollen,  in- 
flamed and  tender,  making  the  dog  lame,  and,  indeed,  almost  unable  to  get 
about;  there  is  redness  between  the  toes,  and  sweating  or  thin  serous 
discharge  therefrom. 

Such  cases  are  often  very  difficult  to  cure.  First  give  a  dose  of  aper- 
ient medicine,  and  keep  the  dog  up,  giving  him  plenty  of  soft  bedding,  and 
a  light  diet.  Foment  the  part  night  and  morning  with  warm  water,  and 
bathe  freely  with  this  lotion:  Calomel,  2  scr. ;  lime  water,  12  oz. ;  mix. 
Shake  the  bottle  well  when  using  it,  which  should  be  done  four  or  five  times 
a  day.  If  the  foregoing  fail,  try  Goulard's  Extract  of  Lead,  2  dr.;  tincture 
of  arnica,  V2  oz.;  distilled  water,  1  pint;  mix  and  apply  freely  four  or  five 
times  a  day.  If  the  case  is  a  very  bad  one,  wrap  the  foot  in  a  piece  of 
lint  saturated  with  the  lotion,  and  pull  over  it  a  chamois  leather  boot, 
which  the  dog  can  be  prevented  from  gnawing  and  pulling  off  by  use  of  a 
muzzle,  over  the  mouth-part  of  which  a  piece  of  canvas  has  been  sewn. 

Concussion  of  the  Brain. — Often  occurs  in  canine  practice,  and  is  due 
to  accidents.  In  most  cases  the  dog  becomes  unconscious,  and  the  breath- 
ing is  heavy  or  usually  nearly  imperceptible.  Gradually  consciousness  re- 
turns, but  often  a  stiffness  of  the  limbs  and  an  uncertain  gait  remains  for 
a  time.  The  treatment  should  consist  in  the  administration  of  stimu- 
lants, but  great  care  must  be  taken  not  to  attempt  forcing  liquid  upon  an 
unconscious  animal,  or  choking  will  be  the  inevitable  result.  Brandy  can  be 
injected  under  the  skin  (subcutaneously).  Ice  when  procurable  should  be 
applied  to  the  head  and  spinal  cord,  and  ammonia  to  the  nostrils.  If  there 
is  a  fracture  of  the  skull  an  operation  will  become  necessary.  A  part  of 
the  bone  may  be  pressing  upon  the  brain,  when  it  would  have  to  be  raised, 
and  so  relieve  the  pressure,  in  which  case  a  vererinarian  must  be  called  at 
once. 

Constipation. — Watch  your  dog  every  day  as  to  condition  of  his  bowels. 
A  dog  properly  fed  and  exercised  will  hardly  ever  be  troubled  with  consti- 
pation. I  turn  my  dogs  out  into  their  yard  each  morning  and  stay  there 
a  few  minutes  and  watch  them.  Their  first  inclination  is  to  hunt  a  place 
and  empty  themselves  (a  dog's  natural  habit).  If  I  find  one  that  is  con- 
stipated, by  this  I  mean  unnaturally  so,  where  passage  is  too  hard  and 
crumbles  up  into  dust  by  putting  your  foot  on  it,  I  watch  that  dog  that 
night,  and  if  still  the  same  it  gets  a  dose  of  castor  oil  the  next  morning, 
unless  as   sometimes  happens, the   bowels  have  meanwhile  corrected   them- 


38  DISEASES 

selves.  No  dog  should  go  over  twenty-four  hours  without  a  passage,  and 
better  if  not  so  long.  As  to  the  size  of  the  dose  of  castor  oil  this  depends 
greatly  on  size  and  age  of  dog.  Take  a  grown  dog  the  size  of  a  fox  terrier 
or  pug,  by  this  is  meant  a  dog  over  a  year  old,  and  you  can  give  it  a  table- 
spoonful.  If  this  don't  work  in  an  hour  or  so,  repeat  the  dose  once.  A 
dog  a  year  old  or  over,  like  an  English  setter,  could  stand  two  tablespoons- 
ful  at  a  dose,  while  the  larger  breeds  like  a  St.  Bernard,  could  stand  an 
ounce  and  a  half,  which  would  be  three  tablespoonsful,  or  even  two  ounces 
at  a  dose.  Some  dogs,  like  some  persons,  are  harder  to  physic  than  others, 
so  that  judgment  should  be  used;  the  idea  being  not  to  give  too  much, 
but  just  enough  to  accomplish  the  desired  result.  Fluid  extract  of  cascara 
sagrada  is  a  remedy  much  used  for  constipation,  and  to  the  dose  of«castor 
oil  from  five  to  twenty  drops  of  this  can  be  added  and  given  with  it  with 
benefit. 

Puppies  from  six  months  to  a  year  old  should  be  given  smaller  doses 
in  proportion  to  age  and  breed  of  dog. 

Young  puppies  as  a  rule  should  have  rather  loose  bowels  than  other- 
wise, and  are  rarely  ever  troubled  with  constipation. 

Watch  your  dog's  bowels,  which  is  easily  done  by  spending  a  few  min- 
utes each  morning  after  it  is  let  out  in  the  yard.  Often  if  only  slightly 
bound  up,  or  passage  is  a  bit  too  hard,  a  little  oatmeal  (same  as  you  cook 
it  for  yourself),  or  some  cooked  liver  for  its  breakfast,  or  a  good  drink 
of  buttermilk  will  loosen  it  up  all  right,  in  place  of  the  oil.  If  passage 
is  normal  (shaped  and  not  hard),  do  nothing  at  all.  Every  dog  should 
empty  itself  at  least  twice  a  clay  and  puppies  oftener. 

Some  dogs  are  troubled  with  chronic  constipation,  and  in  such  cases, 
use  a  laxative  pill,  several  of  which  are  made  for  dogs.  I  have  found  Clay- 
ton's very  good. 

Cough. — Cough,  strictly  speaking,  is  a  symptom  of  disease,  rather  than 
a  disease  itself,  but  it  is  in  very  many  cases  to  non-professional  observation 
the  most  distinct  sign  that  something  is  wrong;  indeed,  so  markedly  is  this 
the  case  that  we  speak  of  a  person  having  a  bad  cough  as  the  ailment  from 
which  he  suffers,  rather  than  the  symptom  of  that  ailment,  and  hence  we 
have  innumerable  specific  remedies  as  cough  mixtures,  cough  pills,  etc. 
Our  dog  we  treat  in  the  same  way,  taking  the  sign  for  the  substance,  the 
smoke  for  the  fire,  and  fortunately  without  much  practical  harm,  for  gen- 
erally speaking,  the  medicine  that  will  ease  a  cough  is  acting  favorably 
on  the  disease  of  which  the  cough  is  an  evidence.  To  decide  what  parti- 
cular disease  is  indicated  by  the  cough,  the  concomitant  symptoms  and 
circumstances,  as  described  under  the  special  disease,  which  are  usually 
preceded  or  accompanied  by  cough,  must  be  taken  into  account,  and  the 
special  treatment  called  for  in  each  case  followed.  Coughs  vary  as  much 
in  character  as  do  the  diseases  of  which  they  are  in  many  cases  the  most 
pronounced  indication.  Thus,  in  common  cold  the  cough  slight  and  humid; 
in  bronchitis,  hard,  dry  and  frequent;  and  in  inflammation  of  the  lungs 
and  pleurisy,  short  and  suppressed,  doubtless  from  the  great  pain  caused  by 
the  effort.  When  the  throat  is  sore,  the  cough  is  hoarse  and  generally  ac- 
companied by  more  or  less  difficulty  in  swallowing;   in  asthma,  the  cough 


DISEASES  39 

may  be  described  as  wheezy,  and  is  often  followed  by  vomiting.  Cough 
in  distemper  has  a  peculiar  husky,  hollow  sound.  Cough  may  be  pro- 
duced by  a  bit  of  bone  or  other  substance  sticking  in  the  throat  and  causing 
irritation,  in  which  case  the  cough  is  the  natural  effort  to  get  relief,  and 
ceases  with  the  removal  of  the  irritating  cause.  As  a  cough  is  almost  in- 
variably connected  with  some  derangement  of  the  respiratory  organs  or 
air  passages,  its  warning  should  never  be  neglected,  and  the  early  resort 
to  the  use  of  the  following  pills  will  be  sure  to  relieve,  will  frequently  cure, 
and  can,  under  no  circumstances,  do  any  harm: 

COUGH  PILL. 

Powdered   ipecacuanha    6   grains 

Powdered   opium    6   grains 

Compound   squill    pill    24   grains 

Powdered  gum  ammoniacum    2  4   grains 

Powdered    licorice 24   grains 

Powdered    rhubarb     12    grains 

Mix  and  make  into  twenty-four  pills;  dose  for  a  15-lb.  to  40-lb.  dog, 
one  pill  night  and  morning;  under  15-lbs.  half  a  pill,  and  for  large 
breeds  give  1 V2  pills  as  a  dose. 

Another  very  good  cough  mixture  for  many  kinds  of  coughs  is: 

Muriate   of  ammonia    2   drams 

Compond  syrup  morphia    2   ounces 

Aqua   destil    2   ounces  . 

Dose:  From  half  to  a  teaspoonful  every  two  hours  according  to  size 
of  dog.     For  puppies  10  to  15  drops  as  a  dose. 

For  a  Bronchial  Cough  (Chronic). — The  following  is  a  very  good  one. 
A  teaspoonful  is  the  dose,  as  this  cough  is,  of  course,  found  in  older  dogs 
only,  and  will  do  for  all  breeds  except  very  small  toy  dogs,  when  half  a 
teapoonful   will    do: 

Spirit    chloroform    y2    dram 

Wine    of   ipecac    3   drams 

Tincture  of  squills 5  drams 

Simple   syrup 1   ounce 

Aqua    to    make 4   ounces 

There  are  a  great  many  other  good  cough  remedies,  in  fact  anything 
good  for  the  master's  cough  is  good  for  the  dog's,  and  I  herewith  give  sev- 
eral prescriptions  that  I  know  to  be  good  by  having  tried  them. 

A  dog  that  is  well  and  in  good  condition  may  have  a  dry  cough,  does 
not  cough  very  much  at  a  time,  but  quite  often.  I  have  cured  such  cases 
with  the  following: 


40  DISEASES 

Carbonate  of  aninioniacum    3  drams 

Fluid  extract  of  belladonna 2  drams 

Gum    camphor    5  drams 

Syrup  of  squills '. 5  drams 

Simple   syrup    4  ounces 

Fluid  extract  of  licorice    4  ounces 

Dose   for  a  medium-sized   dog,   a  teaspoonful   every   four  hours.      This 
is  a  very  good  cough  syrup.     Large  dogs  could  have  1  y2  teaspoonsf ul. 

A  cough  remedy  advertised  for  humans,  called  "Pinex,"  I  tried  on  dogs, 
and  found  it  to  be  very  good  for  many  coughs.  You  can  get  a  fifty  cent 
bottle  of  Pinex  of  your  druggist,  and  from  this,  prepare  at  home,  a  pint 
of  cough  syrup  that  would  cost  a  couple  dollars,  by  mixing  the  contents 
of  the  bottle  in  a  syrup  you  can  easily  make  from  less  than  a  pound  of 
granulated  sugar.  The  dose  would  be  from  half  to  a  teaspoonful,  every 
two  to  four  hours.  Dogs  larger  than  fifty  pounds,  could  stand  a  little 
larger  dose.  I  have  used  this  for  the  cough  a  dog  has  in  distemper,  and 
it  did  the  dog's  cough  good,  not  conflicting  with  the  other  medicines 
being  used. 

"Very  lately  the  following  prescription  was  prescribed  for  me  by  a 
regular  doctor  for  a  chronic,  bronchial,  dry  cough,  that  one  of  my  old 
dogs  has  every  fall  and  winter,  which  nothing  I  had  ever  used  would  stop — 
this  one  did  it — and  I  consider  it  a  most  valuable  one. 

Syrup  Oocillaiia,  Compound  (Parke  Davis  &  Co.). — Dose  would  be  a 
teaspoonful  for  dogs  up  to  50  pounds,  and  a  little  more  for  very  large 
breeds,  every  two  or  three  hours.  A  dose  of  any  cough  syrup  should  al- 
ways be  given  the  last  thing  at  night. 

Here  is  an  "old  fashioned  cough  syrup"  for  a  "sore  throat  cough." 
Boil  down  some  onions  and  brown  sugar,  and  give  teaspoonful  every  twd 
or   three  hours. 

Another  very  sensible  article  on  coughs,  (which  I  found  some  place), 
commends   itself: 

"There  are  two  kinds  of  coughs  that  a  dog  suffers  from;  one  comes 
from  the  throat  and  the  other  from  the  stomach,  and  each  requires  dif- 
ferent treatment.  There  is  about  as  much  use  in  trying  to  cure  a  stomach 
cough  with  a  bronchial  remedy  as  there  would  be  for  you  to  take  a  laxa- 
tive for  chilblains,  and  yet  it  is  often  done.  The  bronchial  cold  may  be 
treated  in  the  following  manner:  Put  in  a  warm  room  and  give  either  cod 
liver  oil,  syrup  of  white  pine  or  some  similar  preparation.  A  good  formula 
for  coughs  in  dogs  is  syrup  of  squills,  syrup  of  wild  cherry,  of  each  two 
parts;  glycerine,  one  part.  If  the  cough  becomes  so  bad  that  there  is  a 
great  deal  of  difficulty  in  breathing,  an  ordinary  water  kettle  placed  over 
a  gas  stove  or  some  other  hot  fire,  so  that  the  escape  of  steam  will  be 
rapid,  will  be  found  to  be  a  relief.  Of  course,  a  regular  bronchitis  kettle 
or  one  of  the  patent  lamps  that  can  be  had  for  a  small  sum  at  any  drug 
store,  can  also  be  used.  In  the  stomachie  cough  it  is  always  wise  to  give 
a    purgative   and    to    treat    for    worms,    as    internal    parasites    are    in    nine 


DISEASES  41 

cases  out  of  ten  the  primary  cause  of  the  trouble.  Two  or  three  days 
should  then  he  allowed  to  elapse,  and  the  treatment  repeated.  This  may 
be  done  a  third  and  even  a  fourth  time,  if  the  cough  does  not  disappear. 
Do  not  physic  every  day  or  you  will  weaken  the  animal  too  much,  but  allow 
two  or  three  days  to  pass." 

Cuts,  Tears  or  Wounds. — The  first  thing  to  be  done  is  to  stop  the 
bleeding,  which  can  generally  be  done  by  simple  pressure  with  the  fingers, 
or  by  a  few  folds  of  lint  pressed  firmly  against  the  cut.  Unless  a  consid- 
erable artery  has  been  severed,  these  means  are  generally  successful,  but  if 
such  is  the  case,  a  ligature  will  be  the  cure.  After  bleeding  is  partially  or 
entirely  stopped,  remove  all  foreign  bodies,  such  as  glass,  dirt,  thorns  or 
splinters,  but  avoid  using  very  cold  or  hot  water  in  doing  so,  having  it  about 
blood  warm.  If  the  cut  or  wound  is  superficial,  the  cleansing,  pressing 
of  the  parts  together  and  dressing  it  with  friars  balsam  or  tincture  of 
myrrh,  applied  with  a  small  brush  or  feather,  will  be  all  that  is  required, 
the  using  of  these  tinctures  leaving  on  the  wound  a  protective  covering 
of  gum.  If  the  lips  of  the  wound  will  not  meet,  draw  them  together  with 
a  few  stitches,  using  a  slightly  curved  suture  needle  and  a  silk  thread 
which  should  be  waxed  with  beeswax  to  prevent  absorption  and  its  acting 
as  a  seaton.  Sewing  up  wounds  is  easy.  Pass  needle  through  the  skin  on 
one  side  of  the  wound  from  the  outside  inward  and  then  through  the 
part  of  the  opposite  lip  from  the  inside  outward,  drawing  the  lips  gentlv 
together,  tie  the  thread  in  a  double  knot  and  cut  ends  off  close.  Do  each 
stitch  separately.  If  the  cut  is  a  long  one,  use  a.  pair  of  light  cross-forceps 
to  hold  the  lips  together  ahead  of  where  you  are  sewing,  as  a  neater  job 
can  be  made  in  so  doing.  The  stitches  should  be  about  a  half  an  inch 
apart  as  a  rule.  It  is  advisable  to  muzzle  the  dog  afterwards  or  keep  on  a 
light  bandage  to  keep  the  dog  from  biting  off  the  threads  and  undoing  the 
stitches  with  his  mouth  and.  tongue.  The  wound  heals  by  adhesion  or  gran- 
ulation matter  forming  and  great  attention  must  now  be  paid  to  keeping 
it  clean  so  as  to  prevent  purification  of  exuding  matter.  Constantly  wash 
away  all  discharge,  sponging  fr-eely  with 

Pure   carbolic   acid    %    ounce 

Glycerine    2  ounces 

With  water  to  make  a  quart.     Or  the  antiseptic  prescription  referred  to  be- 
low. 

In  slight  cuts  in  the  legs  or  feet,  all  that  is  necessary  is  to  wash  well 
and  apply  friars  balsam.  If  severe  and  requiring  bandaging,  apply  a  piece  of 
lint  under  the  bandage  saturated  with  a  mixture  of  friars  balsam  and 
camphorated   oil. 

The  above  is  Dalziel's   idea. 

Lately  I  have  in  such  cases  used  Peroxyde  of  Hydrogen,  or,  better  yet, 
applied  tincture  of  iodine  and  then  to  heal  it  up,  used  the  "Ungucntine" 
salve,  as  advised  in  Bites,  instead  of  the  above,  and  with  best  of  results* 


42  DISEASES 

Either  Dalziel's  or  my  own  will,  however,  do.  In  applying  the  Peroxyde 
of  Hydrogen,  just  tip  the  bottle  up  against  the  wound  for  a  second,  when 
you  will  see  a  white  foaming  or  bubbling  discharge  come  from  the  sore. 
This  should  not  be  wiped  off  or  allowed  to  remain  on  for  over  a  minute 
or  so,  but  removed  then  by  a  little  water  squeezed  on  it  from  a  sponge  or 
cloth.  In  using  the  tincture  of  iodine,  apply  it  with  a  small  brush,  and 
after  it  has  dried,  then  rub  the  "Unguentine"  on,  once  or  twice  daily.  A 
good  idea  is  ,  to  always  keep  on  hand  a  small  vial  of  tincture  of  iodine, 
kept  tightly  corked.  Judgment  must  be  exercised  as  to  length  of  time  the 
wound  is  to  be  kept  open  and  dischorging,  the  Peroxyde  tending  to  close 
it  up,  as  will  the  tincture  of  iodine,  but  use  the  latter  on  wound  as  long 
as  there  is  any  bleeding,  once  a  day  generally  is  often  enough  for  this. 

Chorea. — Dalziel's  treatise  and  treatment  I  give  in  full,  for  it  is 
eminently  correct,  judging  by  my  own  experience.  It  is  a  hard  disease  to 
cure,  but  I  have  cured  young  dogs  one  or  two  years  old.  Read  what 
Dalziel  says,  and  if  you  have  a  dog  so  afflicted,  at  least  try  to  cure  it. 
I  never  admit  but  what  any  disease  can  be  cured,- or  helped,  and  I  try 
every  remedy  anyhow.  Sergeant's  Condition  Pills  have  cured  cases  in 
younger  dogs  for  me,  and  as  they  always  do  good  and  never  harm,  it  is 
worth  while  trying,  for  you  will  be  doing  your  dog  some  good  at  least. 
There  is  not  much,  if  any,  pain  in  chorea,  and  I  had  a  pug  bitch  three 
years  old  that  had  a  chronic  case  of  it,  but  yet  she  bred  and  raised  a 
healthy  litter  of  pups.  This  was  an  exception,  however,  as,  being  a  ner- 
vous trouble,  it  is  transmitable,  and  I  would  not  advise  using  either  a 
bitch  or  a  dog  for  breeding  purposes  that  was  so  afflicted.  It  is,  of  course, 
unpleasant  to  see  a  dog  constantly  twitching  or  jerking,  but  so  long  as  they 
do  not  suffer  I  think  it  my  duty  to  let  them  live. 

"This  most  distressing  complaint  arises  from  some  derangement  of 
the  nervous  system,  and  generally  exists  as  a  sequence  of  distemper,  when 
It  is  known  among  kennel  men  as  "the  twitch."  Chorea,  or  St.  Vitus'  dance, 
may,  however,  arise  from  other  causes,  producing  a  disturbing  effect  on  the 
nervous  system  such  as  a  severe  Injury  or  blow  on  the  head,  the  irrita- 
tion caused  by  worms,  or  long-continued  Impaired  digestion.  By  far  the 
most  common  cause,  however,  is  distemper,  the  brain  receiving  some  in- 
jury in  that  variety  of  the  disease  known  as  "Head  Distemper."  The  symp- 
tom Indicating  chorea  is  a  peculiar  Involuntary  convulsive  twitching  of 
the  muscles.  These  spasmodic  movements  or  jerklngs  may  be  either  par- 
tial or  general,  but  usually  partial.  One  or  both  hind  legs  are  affected, 
or  the  twitching  extends  to  the  muscles  of  the  fore  legs,  neck  and  shoul- 
ders, in  which  case  the  head  is  bobbed  up  and  down  in  a  silly,  helpless 
manner.  Sometimes  the  eyelids  and  muscles  of  the  face  are  affected,  but 
Whatever  part  of  the  body,  is  attacked  the  peculiar  twitching  or  jerking 
Is  always  unmistakable.  When  the  hind  quarters  are  the  seat  of  the 
disease  the  dog  will  sometimes  suddenly  drop  one  of  the  limbs  from  the 
hip  joint,  apparently  from  sudden  loss  of  power  or  command  over  the 
guiding  muscles.  The  weakness  is  strongly  shown  when  the  dog  attempts 
to  jump  onto  a  chair  or  the  lap,  which  he  fails  to  do,  and  generally  falls 
on  hte  side  "all  in  a  heap."  There  are  very  few  dogs  severely  afflicted  with 


r     •    -  DISEASES  43 

chorea  that  ever  get  completely  cured.  When  the  attack  is  but  slight  the 
dog  may  live  for  years  and  prove  a  useful  animal,  as,  except  in  severe 
cases,  it  does  not  seem  to  greatly  impair  the  general  health.  The  con- 
stant twitching  is,  however,  so  annoying  a  sight  to  most  people  that  few 
would  care  to  keep  a  dog  thus  afflicted.  Although  dogs  carefully  and 
properly  treated  in  distemper  are  less  likely  to  suffer  from  this  disease, 
yet  it  will  occasionally  occur  in  the  best  managed  kennels,  and  so  I  must 
proceed  to  consider  its  treatment.  The  first  thing  to  be  done  is  to  attend 
to  the  general  health,  and  especially  to  see  that  the  bowels  are  in  a  properly 
regulated  state;  and  it  is  better,  if  their  action  requires  correction,  to 
endeavor  to  accomplish  that  object  by  a  careful  regulation  of  diet,  rather 
than  by  a  resort  to  physic;  indeed,  all  through  chorea  the  food  must  be 
of  a  nature  easily  digested  and  given  with  regularity  if  any  course  of 
medicinal  treatment  is  to  be  successful.  The  remedies  recommended  in 
chorea  are  arsenic,  sulphate  of  zinc,  nitrate  of  silver  and  nux  vomica  and 
its  preparations.  Arsenic  I  do  not  recommend,  but  either  of  the  following 
may  be  tried,  and  it  is  sometimes  found  that  using  them  alternately  has 
a  more  beneficial  effect  than  a  perseverance  with  one  remedy  only.  Pills 
may  be  made  thus: 

Sulphate  of  Zinc.  Pills. 

Sulphate   of  zinc    2  4   grains 

Extract   of  gentian    18   grains 

Powdered  gum  acacia 18  grains 

Make  into  twelve  pills.  Dose  for  a  dog  30-lb.  to  50-lb.  weight,  one 
pill  twice  a  day.    Small  dogs  a  half  pill  as  a  dose. 

Nitrate  of  Silver  Pills. 

Nitrate  of  silver   3  grains 

Bread    2  drams 

Make  into  twenty-four  pills.  Dose  for  a  dog  30-lb.  to  50-lb.  weight,  one 
pill  twice  a  day  given  at  the  time  of  feeding.  Small  toy  dogs  of 
10  to  12  lbs.  give  one-half  a  pill  as  a  dose. 

The  following  pills  I  have  found  Very  successful,  and  can  Btrongly 
recommend  them,  although,  of  course,  they  a/e  not  infallible.  As  the 
ingredients  require  very  great  accuracy  in  weighing,  and  very  careful 
mixing,  this  must  be  left  to  a  properly  qualified  dispensing  chemist,  and 
the  box  containing  the  pills  should  be  kept  strictly  in  the  master's  pos- 
session, for  fear  of  accident: 

Strychnine    1  grain 

Quinine    18  grains 

Extract  of  belladonna 6  grains 

Extract  of  gentian    1   dram 

Powder  for  Compond  Rhubarb  Pill 1  dram 

Mix  very  carefully  and  divide  into  forty-eight  pills.     Dose  for  a  dpg 


44  DISEASES 

20-lb.  to  40-lb.  weight,  one  pill  twice  a  day  with  his  food.     Small 
dogs,  half  a  pill.     St.  Bernards,  one  and  one-half  pills  as  a  dose. 

"It  is  necessary  in  chorea  to  continue  the  use  of  these  remedies  for  a 
considerable  time — at  least  a  month  or  two  months,  in  most  cases — to 
produce  any  satisfactory  result,  or  even  to  give  them  a  fair  trial;  and,  as 
before  said,  the  dog  must  be  carefully  fed,  well  lodged  and  properly  exer- 
cised when  he  has  sufficient  power  to  use  his  limps,  and  in  the  case  of  dogs 
reared  in  towns,  a  change  to  the  country  for  some  weeks  would  be  beneficial. 
Galvanism  has  been  recommended  for  chorea;  I  have  not  seen  it  tried,  but 
should  think  it  well  worth  a  trial." 

Here  are  two  different  cases  of  chorea  prescribed  for  by  the  American 
Field: 

"About  two  months  since  I  bred  a  young  pug  bitch,  and  shortly  after- 
ward I  noticed  a  nervous  affection  in  her  face;  just  about  as  regular  as 
a  clock  would  tick  the  lower  jaw  would  drop  and  raise  again,  and  for  a  while 
her  tongue  would  hang  out  at  one  side  as  if  partially  paralyzed.  "What  is 
the  probable  cause,  and  what  treatment  should  she  have?  She  did  not 
whelp,  and  this  was  her  first  mating.  Ans. — Chorea;  give  two  drops  of 
Fowler's  Solution  of  Arsenic  three  times  daily  for  six  consecutive  days,  then 
increase  the  dose  one  drop  daily  until  fifteen  drops  are  given  at  each  and 
every  dose;   continue  this  for  one  week,  then  decrease  in  the  same  raitio. 

"Please  prescribe  for  my  English  setter  bitch  that  has  had,  for  the 
last  two  months,  a  severe  jerking  in  her  fore  legs,  seeming  to  be  worse, 
in  damp  weather;  otherwise  she  is  apparently  in  good  health.  The  bitch 
had  the  distemper  about  two  or  three  months  ago.  Ans. — Chorea.  For 
ten  consecutive  days  give  ten  grains  of  iodide  of  potash  three  times  daily, 
then  give  six  drops  of  Fowler's  Solution  three  times  daily  for  seven  con- 
secutive days,  and  on  the  eighth  day  increase  the  dose  one  drop  daily 
until  thirty  drops  are  given  at  each  and  every  dose;  continue  this  for 
fourteen  days  then  decrease  in  the  same  raitio."  The  electric  battery  has 
proved  of  great  benefit  in  many  cases. 

The  two  above  cases  of  chorea  in  a  pug  and  an  English  setter  gives 

you  the  old  and  well-known  Fowlers'  Solution  of  Arsenic  treatment,  and 

prbper  sized  doses,  if  you  wish  to  try  it.     This  is  the  old-time  remedy  and 

has  cured  Chorea  when  directions  were  carefully  followed. 

■•.-., 

The  following  article  on  Chorea  was.  written  especially  for  .this', book 
by  Dent: 

"Chorea  is  the  most  distressing  nervous  complaint  dog  owners  are 
familiar  with.  It  is  due  to  an  involuntary  nervous  discharge  of  the  motor 
cells  controlling  certain  muscles.  The  essential  pathology  of  these  more 
or  less  constant  muscular  twitchings  has  baffled  all  scientific  investigation, 
and  careful  microscopic  autopsies,  extending  from  the  nerve  terminus  in  a 
muscle  back  to  the  cord  and  brain,  have  failed  to  reveal  a  lesion  that  can 
be  considered  a  cause. 

"The  most  satisfactory  theory  is  that  the  brain  cells  controlling  a 
certain  muscle  or  set  of  muscles  are  so  weakened  by  the  poison  of  distemper 
or  some  other  cause  as  to  cause  them  to  send  out  muscular  impulses  with- 
out natural  mental  impulse  or  will  power. 


DISEASES  45. 

"There  is  a  form  of  chorea,  clue  to  a  disturbed  nervous  system,  induced 
by  blows  or  injuries  to  the,  or  the  presence  of  intestinal  parasites  which 
have  deranged  the,  digestive  organs.  This  form  of  chorea  is  generally 
curable.  The  form  which  follows  distemper  is  not  so  amenable  to  treat- 
ment. 

"The  symptoms  are  so  prominent  and  characteristic  that  there  is  no 
mistaking  the  disease,  and  the  peculiar  involuntary  twitching  of  the  muscles 
once  seen  is  never  forgotten.  Then  entire  body  may  be  affected;  generally 
it  is  only  one  set  of  muscles,  those  of  the  foreleg  or  of  the  neck  and  shoul- 
ders, in  which  case  the  head  bobs  up  and  down  in  a  most  helpless  manner. 
Where  the  hindlegs  are  affected  the  dog  will  suddenly  drop  one'  of  the  limbs 
from  the  hip  downward  as  if  there  was  an  entire  loss  of  strength  and 
power.  This  is  particularly  noticeable  if  it  attempts  to  jump  on  a  chair 
or  table,  for,  after  one  or  two  attempts,  it  falls  on  its  side  or  in  a  heap, 
completely  helpless. 

"The  top  of  the  head  is  often  affected  and  twitches  and  throbs  in  a 
most  peculiar  manner,  and  the  jerking  is  commonly  observable  about  the 
muscles  of  the  eyelids,  lips  and  face.  In  severe  cases  of  chorea  the  gen- 
eral health  is  affected,  and  the  animal  shows  signs  of  suffering  probably 
due  to  anxiety  and  appreciation  of  its  helpfulness.  In  mild  cases  it  does 
not  affect  the  animal's  general  health,  and  some  field  dogs  have  it  all 
their  lives  without  affecting  their  usefulness.  The  owner,  however, 
is  annoyed  by  the  constant  muscular  movements  and  is  always  anxious  to 
effect  a  cure.     Some  cases  are  quiet  during  sleep,  others  are  worse. 

"Treatment. — Although  the  disease  occurs  in  the  best  regulated  ken- 
nels, despite  the  most  careful  treatment  of  distemper,  it  does  not  alter  the 
fact  that  dogs  properly  treated  for  distemper  and  worms  and  well  housed 
and  fed  are  less  liable  to  the  disease  than  those  which  are  neglected. 

"The  first  thing  to  do  is  to  look  after  the  animal's  general  health. 
See  that  the  bowels  act  promptly  and  this  is  accomplished  best  by  dieting 
and  the  feeding  of  foods  possessing  laxative  properties  and  not  by  resorting 
to  physics.  If  there  is  the  slightest  suspicion  of  worms  treat  for  them, 
as  they  torment  the  nervous  system  beyond  all  measure  and  are  the  cause 
of  many  attacks. 

"Feed  regularly  and  carefully,  and  if  there  is  a  tendency  to  constipa- 
tion use  well  boiled  oatmeal.  Mutton  broths  with  stale  bread,  beef  well 
boiled  or  raw  lean  beef  chopped  fine.  From  two  to  five  grains  of  pepsin 
and  one-half  grain  of  diastase  can  be  given  after  each  meal,  to  assist  the 
stomach  in  the  process  of  digestion.  If  there  is  much  debility  and  weak- 
ness give  emulson  of  cod  liver  oil  in  doses  of  from  one  teaspoonful  to 
three  tablespoonfuls  three  or  four  times  a  day. 

"The  drugs  principally  used  are  mix  vomica  or  strychnine  and  arsenic. 
Some  practitioners  use  a  dose  of  nux  vomica  in  the  morning  and  arsenic  at 
night.  As  both  of  these  drugs  are  poisonous  they  must  be  used  with  care. 
The  dose  of  nux  vomica  is  from  two  to  twelve  drops  of  the  tincture  twice 
a  day.  It  is  a  valuable  vegetable,  bitter,  and  an  aid  to  digestion  as  well 
as  a  nerve  stimulant.  Any  stiffness  of  the  muscles  or  tendency  to  spasms 
is  an  indication  for  its  immediate  discontinuance. 

"Fowler's  Solution  of  Arsenic  is  the  most  convenient  form.     The  dose 


46  DISEASE3 

is  from  one  to  thirty  drops.  Give  a  drop  at  first,  increasing  it  one  drop 
a  day  up  to  the  larger  dose,  then  gradually  decreasing  and  discontinue 
for  a  time,  and  whenever  there  is  any  constitutional  symptoms  of  its  ef- 
fects, such  as  reddened  or  fullness  under  the  eye,  nausea,  whitish  tongue, 
etc. 

"The  following  pills  are  highly  recommended  by  many  who  have  used 
•them.  As  some  of  the  ingredients  are  poisonous,  they  should  be  prepar- 
ed by  a  qualified  druggist  or  pharmacy  graduate.  Strychnine  one  grain, 
extract  of  belladonna  six  grains,  extract  of  gentian  one  dram,  gipsin  three 
drams.  .  Mix  carefully  and  divide  into  forty-eight  pills,  one  of  which  is 
to  be  given  night  and  morning  in  the  patient's  food.  This  dose  is  for  a 
dog  weighing   from   thirty   to   fifty  pounds. 

"The  medicines  heretofore  mentioned  are,  in  their  action,  purely  alter- 
ative and  nerve  stimulating;  in  connection  with  them  may  be  mentioed 
the  use  of  the  electrical  current  from  a  surgeon's  battery.  Obstinate  and 
apparently  incurable  cases  sometimes  show  a  decided  improvement,  and 
radical  cures  are  effected,  in  response  to  a  gentle  stimulating  current  of 
electricity.  One  electrode  should  be  applied  to  the  neck  directly  over  the 
spinal  cord,  the  other  to  the  extremity  of  the  affected  leg,  and  the  electrical 
stimulation  continued  for  from  five  to  thirty  minutes  twice  a  day.  The 
beneficial  effects  from  a  careful  massage  of  the  leg  and  a  manipulation  of 
the  muscles  cannot  be  overestimated.  Besides  breaking  down  adhesions 
or  agglutinations  of  the  muscle  fibers,  it  increases  the  supply  of  blood  to 
the  part  and  promotes  its  nutrition  and  has  a  most  beneficial  reflex  action 
on   the-  entire   nervous   system." 

Cramp.— This  term  is  often  indiscriminately  applied  by  sportsmen 
to  spasm  from  whatever  cause;  but  cramp  of  the  limbs  from  exposure  to 
cold  and  wet  often  occurs,  and  it  will  quickly  yield  to  brisk  rubbing  and 
warmth.  If  nothing  else  is  handy,  rub  with  a  little  spirit  and  water  or  a 
rough  dry  cloth.  Dogs  used  in  hunting  or  retrieving  from  water  are  very 
liable  to  it,  the  hindquarters  being  most  frequently  affected,  and  in  such 
cases  a  good  brisk  liniment,  such  as  the  following,  should  be  carried  in  the 
boat: 

Stimulating  Liniment. — Compound  camphor  liniment,  3  oz.;  olive  oil, 
spirit  of  turpentine,  and  spirit  of  hartshorn,  of  each  1  oz.;  mix.  A  hot  bath 
is  also  very  effective,  especially  if  the  dog  is  afterward  gently  rubbed; 
care  must,  however,  be  taken  to  dry  the  animal  thoroughly. 

Crooked  Limbs. — See   Rickets. 

Cancer. — This  can  only  safely  be  treated  by  the  verterinary  surgeon. 
The  main  thing  for  the  dog's  owner  is  to  be  able  to  distinguish  between 
cancer  and  other  tumors.  The  safest  plan  is,  however,  not  to  take  any 
chance  by  delay,  but  on  suspicion  consult  the  veterinarian. 

Choking. — This  accident  is  not  uncommon  with  greedy  animals  that 
bolt  their  food;  a  bone,  a  piece  of  gristly  meat,  or  other  hard  substance, 
is  bolted,  and  sticks   fast  in  its  passage  to   the  stomach.      I  always  adopt 


DISEASES  4? 

the  plan  of  reserving  bones  until  after  the  clogs  have  fed,  for  if  given  with 
the  other  food  they  are  at  once  picked  out,  and  the  smaller  ones  are, 
when  the  dog  is  hungry,  apt  to  be  swallowed  unmasticated  and  produce 
choking. 

Treatment. — Frequently  by  manipulating  the  throat  outside  with  the 
fingers  the  obstruction  can  be  worked  down  the  gullet,  or  if  it  can  be  felt 
in  the  upper  part  of  the  throat,  it  may  be  removed  by  the  throat  forceps, 
which  most  veterinary  surgeons  keep  by  them.  Hill  recommends,  when  the 
substance  is  too  low  for  extraction,  and  manipulating  with  the  fingers 
externally  fails,  to  endeavor  gently  to  force  it  down  with  a  piece  of  bent 
whalebone,  having  a  piece  of  sponge  tied  to  the  end  of  it,  and  dipped  in 
oil.  In  using  this  extra  care  must  be  taken  that  the  sponge  is  so  firmly 
attached  to  the  whalebone  that  it  cannot  slip  off,  for  if  swallowed  it  might 
effectually  block  up  one  of  the  smaller  intestines;  therefore,  cut  nitches 
in  the  whalebone,  into  which- tie  the  piece  of  sponge.  As  soreness,  if  not 
actual  laceration,  is  almost  sure  to  be  caused,  the  dog  should  for  some 
days  after  be  confined  to  soft  food. 

The  following,  on  choking,  I  found.  The  subject  is  so  ably  treated, 
that   I   publish  it  also: 

"This  is  of  very  frequent  occurrence  with  dogs,  as  usually  they  are 
voracious  feeders,  careless  of  consequences,  and  the  fact  that  they  use 
their  mouths  much  as  we  do  our  hands  in  grasping  and  conveying  various 
objects  makes  them  particularly  liable  to  swallow  foreign  substances,  that 
may  become  lodged  in  the  gullet.  The  commonest  objects  on  which  dogs 
choke  are  bones  that  they  have  been  feeding  upon.  If  the  bone  lodges 
in  the  back  of  the  throat  it  may  set  up  such  a  violent  coughing  and 
retching  as  to  asphyxiate  the  subject.  The  back  of  the  throat,  however,  is 
not  the  usual  lodging  place,  for  as  a  rule  the  bone  or  other  object  passes 
that  point,  where  the  gullet  is  comparatively  large,  and  lodges  over  the 
heart,  where  it  is  smaller.  Locating  at  this  point  causes  the  greatest 
distress.  The  dog  keeps  gulping  as  if  trying  to  swallow,  and  from  time 
to  time  is  seized  with  a  period  of  retching.  In  a  day  or  two  the  extreme 
distress  passes,  and  the  patient  drinks  water  and  milk  or  other  liquids 
freely  and  can  also  swallow  raw  eggs,  but  if  solid  food  is  taken,  directly 
it  reaches  the  obstruction  it  lodges.  Young  dogs  and  those  which  are 
playful  sometimes  swallow  needles  and  pins.  These  usually  become 
imbedded  in  the  back  of  the  tongue,  and  can  be  removed  from  that  position, 
but  sometimes  they  reach  the  gullet  and  pass  through  into  the  tissues, 
forming  an  abscess,  their  usual  location  being  just  behind  the  angle  of 
the  jaw.  Removing  needles  and  pins  from  the  back  of  the  tongue  is  done 
most  easily  with  a  pair  of  forceps,  although  it  sometimes  can  be.  done  with 
the  finger.  The  principal  thing  is  to  be  careful  not  to  break  the  object. 
The  symptoms  in  these  cases  are  usually  very  severe,  so  that  prompt  action 
is  necessary.  In  those  cases  where  a  bone  has  pased  far  down  the  gullet- 
and  lodged  over  the  heart  it  is  sometimes  sufficient  to  feed  the  dog  a  few 
pieces  of  meat,  which  will  force  the  obstruction  on.  If  this  is  not  success- 
ful a  probang  must  be  uesd  to  force  the  obstruction  down  into  the  stom- 
ach, but  this  should  be  attempted  only  by  a  skillful  veterinarian  or  a 
physician,   as  it  may  be  necessary  to  use  considerable   force,   and   there  is 


48         j  DISEASES 

danger  of  rupturing  the  gullet,,  which,  is  fatal.  If  the  obstruction  cannot 
be  removed  by  the  probang,  then  the  only  thing  remaining  is  to  feed 
the  patient  on  liquid  food  until  such  time  as  the  sharp  points  of  the  bone 
become  dissolved  and  rounded  off,  so  that  it  will  be  easily  pushed  along 
by  the  probang."  _ 

CHLOROFORMING  DOGS  FOR  AN  OPERATION. 

If  it  is  really  necessary  to  do  this,  then  have  a  careful  anethetist  who 
understands  his  subject,  do  the  work.  A  quarter  of  an  hour  is  long  enough 
for  a  dog  to  be  kept  under  the  influence,  and  should  be  ample  time  for  any 
operation.  Chloroform  is  dangerous,  at  best,  with  any  dogs,  and  with  some 
breeds,  Chow  Chows  for  instance,  it  is  sure  to  mean  a  dead  dog.  Anyone 
who  has  had  experience  in  the  destruction  of  dogs  with  chloroform,  knows 
how  quickly  they  succumb  to  it.  Ether  is  a  safer  anesthetic,  which  can 
be  used  with  as  much  success  and   far  less   risk. 

If  an  anesthetic  has  to  be  given,  ask  the  operating  surgeon  to  use 
ether.  The  bet  way  to  give  an  anesthetic:  put  on  a  wire  cage  muzzle, 
having  first  secured  dog  so  he  cannot  struggle.  Around  the  muzzle  an 
ordinary  piece  of  surgeon's  list  can  be  placed,  and  on  this  the  anesthetic. 

For  many  minor  operations,  liquid  cocaine  can  be  used  instead,  the 
dog  strapped  down,  and  his  owner  also  hold  and  control  his  dog.  I  have 
done  this  without  the  strapping  even,  talked  to  the  dog,  he  understood  me, 
and  stood  the  pain.  This  was  the  removal  of  a  cyst  on  a  Pug  dog,  behind 
his  ear,  the  size  of  a  lemon.     Cocaine  was  used. 

Coryza. — See   Catarrh. 

Costiveness. — See  Constipation. 

Caked  Breast. — This  is  generally  caused  by  milk  fever,  a  too  plentiful 
supply  of  milk  which  is  not  nursed  sufficiently  from  the  dam  by  a  small 
litter,  or  will  happen  in  cases  of  the  bitch  loosing  her  puppies.  She  must 
be  milked  three  times  daily  by  hand  (this  done  gently  on  teats  that  are 
hard  and  caked)  for  a  few  days,  gradually  getting  down  to  twice,  and  then 
once  a  day,  stopping  as  the  flow  of  milk  gets  less. 

Also  use  quite  often,  every  two  hours  or  so,  camphorated  oil  or  gum 
camphor  and  lard  melted  together  (which  should  be  kept  in  a  corked 
jar),  rubbing  this  in  well  on  all  the  teats.  This  will  dry  up  the  milk, 
soften  up  the  caked  breasts  and  dry  up  the  hanging  down  bag  as  well, 
making  the  bitch  more  sightly  looking.  A  solution  of  camphor,  tannin 
and  glycerine,  which  any  druggist  can  put  up  for  you,  is  the  very  best 
thing  to  use  alone  for  drying  up  the  bags  of  a  bitch  after  she  has  weaned 
her  puppies. 

Dent  prescribed  for  following  case: 

"My  English  setter  bitch,  six  years  old,  whelped  and  had  a  caked 
udder  but  seemed  to  get  over  it.  Now  one  of  the  front  teats  shows  a 
lump   or   cake   as   large   as   an   English   walnut.      What   treatment   do   you 


DISEASES  49 

advise  and  what  is  it?  Ans. — It  is  simply  caked.  Give  five  grains  of  the 
iodide  of  potash  three  times  a  day  for  two  weeks  and  apply  with  gentle 
friction  to  the  enlarged  teat  the  following  ointment:  Belladonna  extract 
twenty  grains,  gum  camphor  twenty  grains,  lanolin  one  ounce.  She  can  he 
bred  safely  when  she  comes  in   season." 

Claws,  Overgrown — Toy  dogs  and  house  pets  which  have  little  or  no 
exercise  out  of  doors,  where  they  can  dig  and  scrape  the  ground,  and  so 
wear  the  claws  down,  suffer  from  an  overgrowth  of  them.  The  nail  curls 
round,  and,  if  not  cut  in  time,  it  grows  into  the  sole  of  the  foot,  causing 
soreness  and  lameness.  The  ends  of  the  claws  should  be  cut  off  with 
a  pair  of  sharp,  strong  nippers,  or  nail  clippers,  such  as  one  can  buy  at 
any  cutler's  for  7  5  cents.  Puppies'  toe  nails,  especially  of  those  running 
on  grass  or  on  boards  in  winter,  grow  long  and  tend  to  spread  the  toes 
open,  when  the  latter  should  be  compact.  Extreme  care  should  be  ob- 
served that  only  the  dead  white  or  light  colored  nails  is  cut  off,  and  when 
the  nail  is  dark,  judgment  must  be  exercised.  It  is  best  to  clip  little 
and  often,  and  especially  so  if  the  nail  has  a  tendency  to  grow  in. 

In  cases  which  have  been  neglected,  the  process  of  removal  should 
be  gradual,  a  small  portion  being  taken  off  every  few  days  or  so  until 
the  claws  are  of  the  normal  length.  If  the  sole  or  flesh  has  been  pene- 
trated, it  will  most  likely  fester,  and  should  be  freely  bathed  in  warm 
water,  and  the  "Unguentine"  salve  used  to  heal. 

Cold  in  the  Head — See  Catarrh. 

Clipping  Toe  Nails. — See  Overgrown  Claws. 

Callosities. — Bare  callous  places  on  the  dog  from  rubbing,  chafing 
or  lying  on  bare  boards.  Large  dogs  are  very  often  so  troubled.  Glycerine 
or  vaseline  is  used  quite  often,  and  keep  treatment  up  for  some  time,  either 
of  which  will  soften  and  tend  to  remove  these  lumps.  They  do  no  harm 
but  detract  from  the  appearance  of  the  dog.  Eberhart's  skin  remedy  will,  in 
due  time,  fix  them  up,  but  should  be  well  rubbed  in,  twice  daily. 

Catarrh Dogs  that  are   badly  kenneled,   exposed   to  cold  winds,   and 

those  that  have  lately  had  distemper,  or  a  severe  cold,  are  subject  to  an 
inflammation  of  the  membranes  of  the  nostrils  and  air  passages,  and  a  more 
or  less  thick  discharge  of  muco  purulent  matter  from  the  nose,  constitut- 
ing what  is  commonly  known  as  catarrh.  The  disease  is  "disgusting  and 
annoying  in  the  extreme,  and  has  a  very  debilitating  effect  upon  the 
patients  general  health.  The  eyes  become  affected,  and  if  the  disease  is  not 
promptly  treated,  the  inflammation  spreads  to  the  bones  of  the  head,  the 
discharge  unendurably  offensive,  and  the  breathing  is  seriously  interferred 
with.     The  longer  the  disease   is  neglected  the  worse  it  becomes. 

Treatment. — Remove  all  discharge  from  the  nostrils  by  frequent  bath- 
ing with  a  saturated  solution  of  boracic  acid,  as  the  discharge  irritates  the 
external  parts  and  is  liable  to  cause  Eczema.   With  a  small  syringe  a  small 


50  DISEASES 

quantity  of  the  following  solution  shouid  be  injected  into  the  nostrils  three 
times  daily: 

Sulphate  of  zinc ■ 8  grains 

Boracic  acid    30  grains 

Glycerine     1  ounce 

Water    1  ounce 

An  ordinary  atomizer  or  spray  can  be  used  to  good  advantage  several 
times  a  day,  using  either  listerine  or  a  spray  after  the  following  formula: 

Sodal  biborat 1   dram. 

Sodal    carb 1   dram 

Acid   carbolic    6   grains 

Sulp.   of   zinc    1°   grains 

Sulp.  of  morphine .' 10   grains 

Glycerine     , 1   ounce 

Distilled    water    8   ounces 

Keep  dog  in  warm,  comfortable  quarters  and  pay  particular  attention 
to  his  diet.  If  there  is  any  tendency  to  scantiness  of  urine,  or  costiveness, 
give  30  drops  of  cascara  sagrada  in  a  teaspoonful  of  olive  oil.  Feed  any- 
thing he  will  eat  and  give  a  tablespoonful  of  cod  liver  oil  emulsion,  (small 
toys  of  course  less),  or  Fellows'  Syrup  of  Hyphophosphites  four  times  a 
day,  containing  in  addition,  20  drops  of  the  Syrup  of  Iodide  of  Iron.  If 
there  is  much  discharge  from  the  eyes  wash  them  several  times  daily  with 
a   saturated  solution   of  boracic  acid. 

Chronic  Catarrh  of  Uterus. — This  sometimes  occurs  in  bitches,  just 
why  is  hard  to  say.  Such  bitches  are  not  liable  to  breed.  They  come  in 
season  same  as  others,  but  the  discharge  at  such  times  is  white,  really 
the  same  discharge  they  have  had  right  along,  only  not  noticed  perhaps. 
Treatment  would  depend  on  cause  of  the  catarrh,  and  for  which,  refer 
to   "Catarrh." 

Chest  Founder. — See  Kennel  Lameness. 

• 

Catarrh,  or  Cold  in  the  Head.— Dogs  that  live  in  freedom,  although 
exposed  to  changes  of  temperature  and  weather,  are  not  so  liable  to  attacks 
of  catarrh  as  are  those  more  delicately  reared,  in  whom  a  sudden  change 
from  the  close  atmosphere  of  the  room  to  the  open  air,  or  exposure  to  a 
shower  of  rain,  frequently  will  produce  a  cold.  First  symptoms  are  shiv- 
ering and  evident  languor,  succeeded  by  a  hot,  dry  nose,  with  a  thin  dis- 
charge at  first,  but  which  gradually  thickens.  If  the  disease  proceed, 
a  hot  skin,  dullness  about  the  eyes,  with  other  evidence  of  fever,  follow, 
according  to  the  severity  of  the  case.  There  is  more  or  less  discharge 
from  the  nose,  sometimes  accompanied  with  sneezing;  and  if  severe,  and 
the  bronchial  tubes  affected,  a  cough  will  be  the  result.  It' is  pretty  well 
understood,   when  applied   to   ourselves,   that  a   cold  uncared   for,   is  most 


DISEASES  51 

likely  to  lead  to  serious  illness;  and  it  is  no  less  true  of  the  dog.  (See 
also  Ozaena).  In  puppies  the  symptoms  of  common  cold  may  be  mis- 
taken for  those  of  distemper;  and  in  older  dogs,  if  unchecked  and  uncared 
for,  it  is  likely  to  lead  to  bronchitis,  inflammation  of  the  lungs,  or  other 
dangerous  disease.  It  is,  therefore,  very  necessary  to  pay  attention  to 
the  first  appearance  of  a  deviation  from  health  in  this  direction,  mindful 
of  the  old  proverb — "A  stitch  in  time  saves  nine." 

A  coat  placed  on  the  dog,  as  previously  advised  under  Bronchitis. 
Some  hardy  animals  will  need  no  further  care  than  an  extra  warm  bed, 
and  a  warm  supper;  but  others  will  require  more  attention. 

If  conjointly  with  other  symptoms  mentioned,  there  is  a  scantiness 
of  urine,  and  costive  bowels,  give  a  dose  of  aperient  medicine,  follow- 
ed by  a  few  doses  of  the  Fever  Mixture: 

Powdered    Nitre    .' 1   dram 

Sweet  Spirits  of  Nitre   •  Vz    ounce 

Mindererous  Spirit   %    ounce 

Wine   of  antimony    1   dram 

Water    4  ounces 

Dose  for  20  to  50  pound  dog,  one  tablespoonful  every  four  hours  in 
a  little  gruel.  Smaller,  or  younger  dogs,  a  teaspoonful  to  a  de- 
sertspoonful. 

Remove  any  discharge  from  the  eyes  with  warm  water.  If  they  are  in- 
flamed, bathe  with  the  following  lotion:  Boracic  acid,  powdered,  1  scr. ; 
distilled  water,  6  oz.  To  allow  the  dog  to  breathe  freely,  the  nose  must 
be  bathed,  which  will  tend  to  prevent  accumulation  of  mucus.  During  con-, 
valesence  the  following  is  useful:  Easton's  Syrup  %oz.,  water  to  6  ounces. 
Dose,  a  desertspoonful  to  a  tablespoonful  twice  a  day  after  food.  Here 
is  where,  in  place  of  this,  I  would  use  Eberhart's  Tonic  Pill.  Unless  the 
cold  has  engendered  some  more  dangerous  complaint,  this  treatment  will 
be  all  that  is  required.  If  the  cough  be  severe,  use  some  cough  remedy. 
See  Cough. 

Calculi. — The  dog  is  more  frequently  the  subject  of  Calculi  (stone), 
than  is  generally  supposed.  Their  locality  varies;  may  exist  in  the  biliary 
ducts,  the  bladder,  the  kidneys,  or  in  the  urethra  (the  passage  of  the  penis). 
In  Biliary  Calculi,  those  stones  situated  in  the  biliary  ducts,  providing 
they  are  sufficiently  small  to  pass  the  duct,  are  not  of  great  moment — in 
fact,  upin  post  mortem  their  existence  has  often  been  discovered,  while 
during  life  po  pain  or  inconvenience  was  noticed,  but  should  these  stones 
be  too  large  to  pass  the  ducts,  they  are  very  painful  and  a  most  fruitful 
cause  of  jaundice.  The  bile,  which  in  health  passes  through  these  ducts, 
becomes  completely  impeded  in  its  progress,  and  is  re-absorbed  by  the 
blood  vessels  entering  the  general  system,  and  jaundice  is  established. 
The  symptoms  of  biliary  calculi,  when  not  completly  blocking  the  ducts, 
are  excessive  sickness  and  constipation,  with  pain  in  the  abdomen.  The 
treatment  should   consist   in   allaying   the   pain,    when   the   stone   will   fre- 


52  -  f  DISEASES 

quently  pass  in  a  natural  way.  For  this  give  5  to  30  drops  tincture  of 
opium  every  four  hours,  in  a  little  water,  and  a  soap  and  water  enema 
night  and  morning  to  relieve  the  bowels,  opium  having  a  tendency  to  con- 
stipate. 

Cystic  Calculi  is  stone  found  in  the  bladder.  It  is  supposed  that 
their  existence  is  rare,  but  such  is  not  the  case.  A  single  large  stone  is 
not  frequently  seen,  but  a  number  of  small  ones,  especially  in  old  dogs, 
is  not  at  all  uncommon.  In  the  former  case,  nothing  short  of  an  opera- 
tion can  possibly  effect  a  cure;  but  when  one  takes  into  consideration  the 
necessity  of  keeping  a  patient  in  one  position  after  the  operation  it  will 
be  patent  to  most  that  in  canine  practice  the  removal  of  the  stone  is 
seldom,  if  ever,  attended  with  success.  Small  calculi  will  frequently  pass 
from  the  bladder  into  the  urinary  passages,  and  if  small  enough,  out  of 
the  body,  through  the  penis;  but  often  these  stones  will  become  fixed  in 
the  urethra  and  the  dog  is  unable  to  pass  its  water.  The  bladder  be- 
comes distended,  and  if  not  relieved,  rupture  of  the  organ  results.  When 
you  find  a  dog  cannot  pass  its  water,  get  a  catheter,  rub  a  little  olive  oil 
or  vaseline  upon  it,  and  the  instrument  inserted  at  the  tip  of  the  penis.  Of 
course,  the  dog  must  be  placed  on  its  back.  Insert  the  catheter  very 
gently,  and  gradually  pass  it  into  the  bladder.  If  there  is  a  small  calculus 
in  the  urethra  the  passage  of  the  catheter  will  be  obstructed,  and  while 
this  is  so,  no  extreme  force  must  be  used,  or  a  very  extensive  injury  may 
result.  A  little  gentle  and  prolonged  pressure  may  return  the  stone  into 
the  bladder,  and  so  allow  the  urine  to  pass.  If  the  stone  cannot  be  re- 
turned in  this  attempt,  inject  into  the  passage  of  the  penis,  a  little  olive 
oil,  and  repeat  the  operation  with  the  catheter.  Calculi  sometimes  exist  in 
the  kidneys  and  may  pass  into  the  bladder,  thence  through  the  urinary 
passage,  and  so  out  of  the  body;  but  at  other  times  they  become  too  large 
to  leave  the  organ,  causing  intense  pain  and  subsequent  death.  The  symp- 
toms are  first,  stiffness  across  the  loins,  accompanied  by  pain  when  an 
attempt  is  made  to  move;  the  urine  is  passed  in  small  quantities,  and  is 
frequently — indeed  often — tinged  with  blood.  In  such  cases  it  is  a  matter 
of  relieving  the  pain,  with  the  hope  that  the  stone  is  small  enough  to  gain 
an  exit  by  the  penis.  To  relieve  the  pain  give  5  to  30  drops  of  tincture 
of  opium,  about  every  four  hours,  and  apply  hot  flannels  to  the  loins.  A 
dose  of  oil  to  relieve  the  bowels  is  beneficial,  as  any  straining  in  passing 
the  faeces  would  increase  the  pain.  It  is  best  to  leave  these  cases  to  the 
veterinarian. 

Dew  Claws. — Darwin  describes  as  "accidental  monstrosities,"  yet  a  gen- 
eral opinion  prevails  that  dew  claws  are  the  peculiar  inheritance  of  a  few 
breeds  of  dogs,  and  from  this  false  idea  possession  or  non-possession  of 
these  now  utterly  useles,  clumy  and  ugly  appendange  has  been  set  up 
as  a  test  of  purity  or  impurity  of  breeding  in  specimens  of  the  variety 
of  which  they  are  wrongly  ascribed  as  being  the  peculiar  property.  The 
dew  claw  is  attached  to  a  rudiment,  more  or  less  developed,  of  an  addi- 
tamentary  phalange  or  toe  situated  on  the  inner  side,  one  to  each  foot,  dis- 
tant from  and  considerably  above  the  other  toes. 


I      <  DISEASES  53 

These  additional  toes  are  frequently  unattached  to  any  corresponding 
metacarpal  or  metatarsal  bone,  having  only  a  ligamentary  union,  so  that 
the  term  is  equally  applicable  to  the  extra  toe  often  seen  on  the  foreleg; 
and,  as  they  are  neither  useful  nor  ornamental,  I  would  in  all  cases  have 
them  removed,  being  only  a  disfigurement  in  any  breed.  This  should  be 
done  when  the  pups  are  with  the  dam,  as  she  will  take  care  of  the  wound 
and  heal  it  up  by  licking  it;  and  this  can  be  easily  done  with  a  pair  of 
strong  scissors.  If  left  till  the  dog  is  older,  they  are  liable  to  bleed  a  good 
deal,  and  the  pain,  of  course,  is  greater;  in  such  case,  the  wound  produced 
by  the  excision  should  be  at  once  well  saturated  with  frairs'  balsam.  If 
it  is  thought  well  to  remove  the  nail  only,  that  can  be  done  by  pulling  it 
out  with  a  pair  of  nippers. 

DESTRUCTION  OF  DOGS. 

"It  is  often  necessary  to  destroy  dogs  that  have  become  so  crippled  or 
injured  as  to  make  cure  very  doubtful;  and  in  most  litters  of  puppies 
there  are  some  so  puny  or  so  wanting  in  the  characteristics  of  the  breed 
that  they  ought  not  to  be  reared.  In  the  latter  case  it  is  most  humane  to 
destroy  such  as  are  not  wanted  as  soon  after  they  are  born  as  possible;  but 
even  when  a  mesalliance  has  taken  place,  one  at  least  of  the  puppies  should 
be  left  with  the  dam,  unless  one  or  more  foster  pups  of  pure  blood  can 
be  substituted. 

For  destroying  young  puppies  there  is  no  more  convenient  or  less 
painful  method  than  drowning;  while  for  mature  dogs  a  teaspoonful  of 
Scheele's  prussic  acid  will  cause  instantaneous  death.  In  giving  it,  the 
mouth  of  the  dog  should  be  held  open  and  upwards,  and  the  acid  poured 
well  back  on  the  tongue.  The  very  greatest  care  is,  however,  necessary 
in  dealing  with  a  drug  of  such  potency;  and  it  would  be  highly  dangerous 
to  life  if  any  of  it  were"  spilled  over  a  cut  or  wound." 

The  above  was  written  I  think,  by  F.  J.  Skinner,  as  I  got  it  from  Field 
and  Fancy,  and  give  it  as  good  advise.  I  bave  used  the  prussic  acid  in 
cases  of  an  old  and  helpless  dog,  that  had  to  be  put  out  of  the  way,  and 
it  worked  very  quickly,  as  its  action  goes  direct  to  the  heart,  the  pain  so 
short,  that  it  seems  to  be  humane.  Lately  I  have  cloroformed  several, 
and  rather  favor  the  chloroform  route.  I  lay  the  dog  down  on  its  side,  my 
right  hand  under  a  piece  of  carpet  on  which  is  some  cotton  in  the  center, 
and  have  an  assistant  pour  on  this  cotton  the  chloroform,  and  I  then  quickly 
apply  this  to  the  nose  of  the  dog,  the  cotton,  and  quickly  pull  the  carpet 
around  the  head  to  neck,  holding  it  there  so  no  air  can  get  in,  the  assis- 
tant meanwhile  holding  the  back  part  and  legs  of  dog.  The  dog  will  gen- 
erally resist  the  fumes  of  the  chloroform,  but  only  for  a  few  seconds,  and 
in  about  a  minute  he  will  be  dead,  providing  he  has  not  gotten  the  carpet 
loose,  and  some  air  thereby. 

Drowning  is  as  painless  as  any  death  can  be,  especially  for  puppies. 
I  get  a  pail,  fill  it  partly  full  of  water,  bave  a  pan  that  fits  the  top  of  the 
pail,  put  puppies  in,  the  pan  on  quickly,  and  on  top  of  the  pan  a  rock  or 
lump  of  coal,  heavy  enough  to  hold  pan  down,  and  then  I  go  away. 

Debility   and  Wasting. — It  happens   sometimes   that  a   dog   gradually 


54  DISEASES 

V 

becomes  weak  and  wasting  in  flesh,  and  you  haven't  found  the  cause.  In 
such  cases  Eberhart's  Tonic  Pills  are  just  what  the  dog  should  have  for 
a  few  weeks,  as  they  can  do  no  harm,  but  will  do  great  good  in  building  a 
run  down  dog  up,  create  an  appetite  and  work  on  all  the  organs,  invigorat- 
ing the  system.  They  are  different  from  other  condition  pills,  as  they 
contain  no  arsenic  or  "dope"  of  any  kind.  Add  to  the  dogs  diet  for 
a  few  days,  some  raw,  lean  beef  cut  up  fine,  sprinkled  with  a  little  pepsin, 
once  a  day.  Also  look  for  any  symptoms  of  divergence  from  health  which 
may  indicate  the  cause  of  the  trouble. 

Docking  Tails — While  this  is  not  a  disease,  yet  it  happens  frequently 
that  puppies  suffer  not  a  little  from  this  being  clumsily  done.  It  is  not  a 
painful  operation  if  properly  done  and  before  puppy  is  weaned.  Fox  ter- 
riers, poodles  and  a  few  other  breeds  should  have  their  tails  docked  to 
conform  to  present  bench  show  requirements.  An  old  superstition  exists 
with  some  people  yet  that  a  tail  must  be  bitten  off,  which  is  simply  erron- 
eous and  disgusting.  Never  use  a  shears  or  scissors  as  the  pinching  before 
the  cut  would  cause  more  pain  than  the  cutting.  Before  you  are  ready  to 
cut  the  tail  get  an  ounce  of  tincture  of  iron.  .Have  a  solid  block  or  table, 
have  an  assistant  hold  the  puppy  up  to  it  with  its  tail  laid  on  the  block; 
calculate  how  long  or  short  a  tail  you  want  (three  inches  is  about  right), 
then  let  assistant  hold  puppy  up  to  table  with  tail  lying  on  it;  have  a  sharp 
butcher  knife  ready,  and  with  one  quick  and  rapid  cut  the  tail  is  off.  Tip 
your  bottle  of  tincture  of  iron  up  to  and  against  the  end  of  tail  and  drop 
your  pup  down  in  the  yard.  I  have  docked  the  tails  of  a  litter  of  poodle 
pups  when  not  one  of  them  gave  a  cry  or  yelp  from  the  operation,  but 
did  not  seem  to  notice  it  at  all  and  went  on  playing  as  usual  as  if  nothing 
had  occurred.  The  mother  will  lick  and  take  care  of  the  tails,  and  they 
will  heal  up  in  due  time.  Pull  the  skin  back  with  your  left  hand  when 
you  are  ready  to  do  the  cutting. 

Dysentery. — This  is  a  more  dangerous  disease  than  diarrhea,  which, 
when  protracted,  sometimes  causes  it,  and  may  be  described  as  diarrhea 
in  its  most  aggravated  form;  there  is  generally  feverishness  present,  con- 
siderable pain,  and  the  evacuations  are  often  black  in  color  and  very  offen- 
sive, and  followed  by  discharge  of  a  gelationous-like  substance  mixed  with 
blood.  The  loss  of  strength  is  very  rapid,  and  the  dog  must  be  supported 
by  drenching  with  beef  tea  and  a  little  port  wine  in  it,  the  medicine  and 
general  treatment  being  the  same  as  in  diarrhea.  In  one  case  of  this  kind, 
in  a  retriever,  I  gave  two  doses  of  twenty  drops  of  chlorodyne  with  very 
good  effect.  The  discharges  in  dysentery  are  immediately  caused  by  in- 
flammation of  the  mucous  membrane  lining  in  intestines,  and  are  distin- 
guished from  diarrhea  by  containing  no  fecal  matter  except  occasionally 
wTaen  it  is  voided  in  lumps;  but  the  ordinary  evacuations  in  dysentery, 
although  they  vary  in  appearance,  are  generally  slimy  looking  and  com- 
posed of  mucus  mixed  with  blood,  and  in  the  advanced  stages  of  the 
disease  pus  is  discharged  and  shreds  of  the  mucus  membrane,  very  offen- 
sive in  character.     The  disease  is  very  weakening,  causes  great  pain  and 


DISEASES  55 

straining,   and    is   very   difficult   to   manage;    it   often    occurs   in    protracted 
cases  of  distemper,  and  carries  off  the  patient. 

In  treating  dysentery  the  "anodyne  mixture"  given  in  diarrhea  treat- 
ment should  be  tried  in  the  first  instance  alone,  and  if  ineffectual,  one  of 
the  following  pills  for  a  dog  of  60-lb.  to  SO-lb.,  every  four  hours  may  be 
tried  with  good  results.     For  smaller  dogs  half  a  pill. 

Pills  for  Dysentery. 

Take  of  tannic  acid  2  scruples  and  pure  sulphate  of  copper  1  dram, 
powdered  opium  20  grains,  mixed,  and  divide  into  twenty  pills;  or  if  a 
liquid  medicine  should  be  preferred,  the  following  will  answer:  Take  of 
pure  sulphate  of  copper  48  grains,  dissolve  in  2  ounces  of  cinnamon  wa- 
ter; add  V2  ounce  of  tincture  of  catechu,  y2  ounce  of  laudanum,  6  drams  of 
aromatic  spirits  of  ammonia,  and  make  up  to  12  ounces  with  cinnamon 
water.  Dose  for  an  80-lb.  dog  two  tablespoonfuls  every  four  hours;  smaller 
dogs  in  proportion.  Clysters  of  starch,  with  one  dram  of  laudanum  in  each, 
are  often  very  beneficial,  and  one  may  be  thrown  up  every  four  or  five 
hours. 

The  patient  should  have  perfect  rest,  all  evacuations  should  be  in- 
stantly removed,  and  the  place  where  the  patient  is  (which  should  be  warm 
but  airy)  kept  sweet  with  disinfectants.  The  food  should  consist  of  pearl 
barley,  rice,  arrowroot  or  wheaten  flour,  boiled  in  milk,  varied  with  strong 
beef  tea  slightly  thickened  with  stale  bread  or  plain  biscuit. 

I  have  cured  dogs  of  dysentery  of  long  standing,  obstinate  cases,  with 
the  following  prescription,  which  was  found  to  be  very  valuable  in  the 
treatment  of  such  cases  in  the  human  race — of  soldiers  who  contracted  this 
disease  in  the  war  of  '61.  A  friend  of  mine,  a  noted  doctor  in  human  prac- 
tice, gave  it  to  me  and  I  "tried  it  on  a  dog,"  succeeding  in  effecting  a  per- 
manent cure,  since  which  time  I  have  used  it  in  several  such  cases  with 
success.  Take  sima  ruba  bark,  two  ounces,  and  put  it  in  a  quart  of  water, 
boil  this  down  to  a  pint,  then  strain  and  boil  this  down  to  half  a  pint. 
(Be  careful  to  not  burn.)  The  dose  for  a  dog  the  size  of  a  pointer  would 
be  a  teaspoonful  three  times  a.  day.  Large  dogs  like  a  St.  Bernard,  two 
teaspoonfuls  at  a  dose,  while  very  small  toy  dogs  like  a  toy  terrier,  should 
have  half  a  teaspoonful  at  a  time. 

The  following  prescription  was  furnished  me  by  Mr.  J.  A.  Rogers,  of 
Ironton,  Ohio,  after  trying  it  on  his  pointer  that  had  suffered  with  chronic 
dysentery  for  over  a  month  till  the  dog  was  a  skeleton  and  could  hardly 
stand  up.  This  dog  had  been  treated  for  worms,  at  first  supposed  to  be 
the  cause  of  the  trouble,  and  several  well-known  remedies  tried,  but  no 
worms  and  no  stoppage  of  the  dysentery.  As  a  last  resort  he  tried  this 
prescription,  and  cured  the  dog.  From  a  full  history  of  this  extreme  case, 
furnished  me  by  several  letters  during  its  duration,  I  have  concluded  that 
this  is  a  very  valuable  remedy  and  likely  to  cure  when  everything  else  fails: 

Specific  aconite    10   drops 

Specific    baptisia 10   drops 

Specific    ipecac    15   drops 

Specific  ecefolta    " 1  dram- 


f,6  DISEASES 

Glycerine    •  •  •  .      4  drams 

Add  water   (distilled)   to  make   8   ounces 

Of  the  first  four  articles  use  only  Lloyd  Bros.'  preparations — a  Cincinnati 
wholesale  drug  firm.  If  your  druggist  doesn't  have  them  in  stock,  he  can 
get  them  by  ordering  from  Lloyd  Bros.',  or  I  can  get  this  prescription 
filled  and  send  you.  The  dose  would  be  at  first — until  you  see  a  change 
for  the  better — a  teaspoonful  every  hour  until  three  or  four  doses  are  given, 
then  every  two  hours.  Of  course,  if  the  patient  should  be  a  very  young 
puppy,  the  dose  should  be  smaller,  but  such  cases  of  dysentery  are  seldom 
found  in  puppies,  except  when  a  very  great  looseness  of  the  bowels  appears, 
generally  due  to  worms;  such  cases  very  likely  will  be  cured  by  proper 
worm  treatment,  which  find  under  heading  of  Worms.  In  above  pre- 
scription the  ecefolta  is  most  excellent  for  the  blood,  blood-poisoning  and 
as  a  disinfectant  to  kill  germs,  and  to  reduce  fever,  which  every  dog  has 
in  a  case  of  dysentery.  Dog  also  has  a  cold  which  the  aconite  will  relieve. 
The  baptisia  is  for  fever  and  the  blood,  the  ipecac  for  the  stomach  and 
mucous  membrane  of  the  stomach  and  bowels.  I  will  add  here  that  this 
remedy  was  intended  by  the  regular  doctor,  who  prescribed  it  for  this  dog 
— for  humans,  but  was  tried,  and  successfully,  on  the  dog  in  this  case. 
Worms  may  have  been  the  original  cause  of  this  case  of  dysentery.  Dry 
browned  toast  soaked  in  meat  broths  or  gravy  is  very  good  food  to  use  in 
such   cases   of  dysentery. 

Dent  has  written  especially  for  this  book  the  following  on  Dysentery: 

"This  disease  is  frequently  neglected  with  the  false  hope  that  it  will 
cure  itself.  It  is  a  serious  affection  and  demands  prompt  care  and  treat- 
ment. Causes  are  inflammation  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  lower 
bowels  or  large  intestines,  accompanied  by  ulceration,  and  in  many  cases 
bleeding.  The  action  of  poisons,  eating  of  putrid  food,  rapid'  changes  from 
heat  to  cold  and.  vice  versa,  also  the  after-effects  of  inflammation  of  the 
small  intestines. 

"Symptoms. — At  first  there  is  a  loss  of  appetite,  restlessness,  painful 
condition  of  the  bowels,  as  attested  by  pressure  on  the  belly.  The  nose  is 
hot  and  dry,  the  animal  is  feverish,  and  at  first  constipated.  Afterwards 
the  bowels,  after  more  or  less  straining,  begin  to  move,  the  passages  are 
putrid  and  more  disagreeable,  become  more  frequent  and  tinged  with  blood 
as  a  result  of  injury  to  the  bowels,  or  with  pus  as  a  result  of  ulceration. 

"Treatment. — Give  a  dose  to  a  40-lb.  dog,  %oz.  each  of  olive  oil  and 
castor  oil,  to  which  can  be  added  from  10  to  20  drops  of  laudanum;  small- 
er and  larger  dogs  a  proportonate  dose.  Give  injections  of  boiled  starch 
water,  with  20  to  40  drops  of  laudanum.  If  the  disease  has  become  chronic 
it  may  be  necessary  to  try  several  different  prescriptions  before  arriving 
at  a  cure.     Here  is  one: 

Sub-nitrate    of   bismuth    2   drams 

Ipecacuana   powdered    30  grains 

Pepsin     1   dram 

Siastrase    ,  4  grains 

Dose. — Divide  into   12   powders  and  give  one  three  times  a  day. 


DISEASES  57 


"And  here  another: 


Acid    tannic 2   drams 

Opium  powdered    12   grains 

Pepsin 1  dram 

"Dose. — Divide  into  12  powders  and  give  one  three  times  a  day.  The 
foregoing-sized  doses  are  based  on  a  40-lb.  dog.  Smaller  or  larger  dogs 
in  proportion.  Feed  white  of  egg,  gelatin,  beef  tea,  lime  water  and 
milk,  toast  and  beef  tea.     Keep  the  patient  warm  and  quiet." 

Diarrhea. — Diarrhea  is  of  very  frequent  occurrence  in  dogs,  and  more 
particularly  in  young,  puppies  and  in  old  and  overfed  dogs.  It  generally 
exists  as  a  result  of  indigestion,  brought  on  by  improper  feeding.  The 
practice  of  leaving  stale  food  from  one  meal  to  another  is  a  common  source 
of  this  disease.  Diarrhea  may  be  classed  as  acute  and  chronic.  In  the 
acute  form  there  is  much  looseness  of  the  bowels,  frequently  accompanied 
or  preceded  by  copious  vomiting  of  acrid  offensive  matter;  the  evacua- 
tions are  loose,  watery  and  offensive.  If  not  checked,  it  soon  produces 
excessive  weakness,  and,  especially  in  puppies,  is  the  cause  of  great  mor- 
tality. In  the  chronic  state  the  disease  is  slower  in  its  progress  and  longer 
in  its  duration.  It  may  be  set  up  by  a  diseased  liver  and  excess  of  bile,  or 
it  may  be  the  result  of  inflammation  of  the  bowels.  A  by  no  means  un- 
common cause  is  the  abuse  of  calomel  and  other  mercurials,  these  being 
"specifics"  with  many  persons  for  all  dog  diseases.  Diarrhea  often  finishes 
up  the  work  of  distemper,  and  this  is  so  in  most  cases  where,  as  too  fre- 
quently happens,  mercurials  have  been  relied  on  as  a  cure  for  that  dis- 
ease. Worms  are  also  a  common  cause  of  diarrhea,  and  when  these  exist 
the  nature  of  the  discharge  is  variable,  frequent  and  small  in  quantity, 
Sometimes  lumpy,  followed  by  gelatinous,  glary  matter,  and  often  frothy 
and  covered  with  small  air  bubbles.  When  worms  appear  to  be  the  cause, 
means  should  be  taken  to  expel  them  as  directed  later  on.  Exhalations 
from  accumulations  of  filth,  and  especially  in  low  lying,  damp  and  badly 
drained  and  badly  ventilated  kennels,  are  also  a  cause  of  diarrhea,  and 
one  which  never  should  exist.  In  treating  diarrhea  it  is  often  of  con- 
siderable advantage  to  give  a  mild  purge  to  remove  the  irritating  cause. 
Castor  oil  is  very  suitable;  and,  if  there  is  evidence  of  much  pain  attend- 
ing the  disease,  a  dose  of  laudanum,  from  20  to  30  drops,  may  be  added. 
As  a  remedy  in  diarrhea  I  know  of  nothing  equal  to  the  following  mix- 
ture, which  very  rarely  fails  to  check  it  if  the  patient  at  the  same  time 
receives  proper  attention  in  other  respects: 

Astringent  Anodyne  Mixture  for  Diarrhea. 

Take  prepared  chalk 3   drams 

Aramatic   confection    (powder)     :  .    2   drams 

Powdered  gum  acacia 1   dram 

(Laudanum)    tincture  of  opium    1   ounce 

Oil  of  cassia   6   or  8   drops 

Tincture  of  catechu    3  drams 


58  DISEASES 

Spiritis  of  sal  volatile' 2    drams 

Water  sufficient  to  make   8   ounces      • 

The  powders  must  be  rubbed  very  fine  in  a  mortar,  the  oil  of  cassia  within 
them;  the  water  must  be  gradually  added,  rubbing  well  to  form  a  smooth 
mixture.  The  tincture  added  in  the  bottle.  Of  this  mixture  the  dose  will 
be  from  a  half  to  two  teaspoonfuls  for  puppies,  and  from  one  to  two  table- 
spoonfuls  for  full-grown  dogs,  given  every  three  or  four  hours,  as  long  as 
the  purging  continues.  The  bottle  must  be  well  shaken  before  measuring 
the  dose. 

When  getting  this  filled,  I  would  advise,  either  taking  your  book 
to  the  druggist,  or  copying  and  showing  him  as  to  the  mixing  of  the  above. 

For  convenience  of  form  the  following  may,  under  circumstances,  be 
preferred,  as  it  keeps  well  and  is  in  less  compass:* 

Spirits   of  camphor    2  drams 

Laudanum     xk  ounce 

Spirits  of  volatile    '.  .    2  drams 

Tincture  of  catechu 1  ounce 

Mix.  Dose,  from  twenty  drops  to  a  teaspoonful  in  water  every  three  or 
four  hours,  if  required. 

"The  diet  must  be  carefully  regulated  all  through  the  disease;  such 
light  and  easily-digested  food  as  well  boiled  oatmeal,  rice  or  arrowroot 
should  be  given,  with  milk  or  beef  tea,  and  if  the  patient  refuses  to  feed, 
a  little  should  be  given  with  a  spoon  or  a  drencher  every  two  or  three 
hours;  when  the  dog  is  very  weak,  add  a  little  port  wine  to  the  food;  in- 
stead of  plain  water,  give  rice  or  barley  water  to  drink.  In  the  case  of 
bitches  suckling,  the  diet  must  be  changed,  a  dose  of  castor  oil  given,  and 
the  'astringent  anodyne  mixture'  in  small  closes,  or  an  injection  may.  be 
administered. 

"If  the  diarrhea  is  very  persistent,  and  accompanied  by  blood,  inject 
twice  a  day  into  the  rectum  2  gr.  to  5  gr.  of  sulphate  of  copper  with  15  to 
60  drops  of  tincture  of  opium  in  4  oz.  of  water.  If  this  does  not  check  it, 
then  give  %  gr.  to  Vz  gr.  of  sulphate  of  copper,  increasing  the  dose  to 
1  gr.  with   V2   gr.  to   1  gr.  of  powdered  opium. 

"It  is  most  important  that  rigorous  cleanliness  should  be  observed. 
All  discharges  should  be  immediately  removed,  and  the  animal  kept  clean 
by  sponging  with  lukewarm  water  if  necessary,  while  disinfectants  should 
be  sprinkled  'about.  The  patient  should  also  be  kept  warm,  and  left  as 
quiet  and  undisturbed  as  possible. 

Dr.  Clayton's  diarrhea  cure  I  have  found  a  very  good  remedy  in  many 
cases.  Spratt's  Patent  (see  advertisement)  makes  a  diarrhea  pill  that  I 
have  often  used  on  my  dogs,  and  with  great  success,  in  checking  up  this 
trouble,  which  is  often  caused  in  dogs  at  a  show  by  the  change  in  water 
drank  there  and  on  the  trip.  A  tablet  or  pill  is  often  more  easily  admin- 
istered than  a  liquid. 

A  party  wrote  as  to  a  diarrhea  from  distemper  in  a  six-months-old 
pointer  puppy,  just  over  the  distemper,  that  is  getting  along  nicely  and 


DISEASES  59 

has  a  fairly  good  appetitte,  but  is  bothered  with  diarrhea.  His  passages 
are  very  thin  and  very  offensive.  The  puppy  tries  to  do  something  quite 
often,  and  then  walks  all  over  the  kennel  yard  and  passes  a  few  drops  only. 
At  the  first  stage  of  the  distemper  I  doctored  him  for  worms  and  took  many 
from  him.  For  the  last  five  or  six  weeks  I  have  fed  him  on  eggs  and  milk, 
boiled  together,  with  a  few  crackers  in  each  mess.  The  diarrhea  seems  to 
hold  him  back  so  he  don't  get  fat  as  he  should.  The  answer  was  to  give 
the  dog  the  following,  and,  if  necessary,  to  repeat  the  dose: 

Chalk    5  grains 

Laudanum     5  grains 

Ether     5   drops 

Mix  and  give  in  soup  or  milk;  continue  same  feeding  and  to  also  give  dry, 
well-browned  toast  soaked  in  meat  broths  or  meat  gravy  made  with  flour 
in  it.     Understand  that  the  above  prescription  was  for  one  dose. 

Dislocations. — It  is  much  the  safest  and  best  plan  in  such  cases  to  at 
once  summon  the  veterinarian,  and  not  trust  to  yourself,  as  the  veretin- 
arian's  knowledge  of  anatomy  and  experience  in  operations  of  this  kind 
enables  him  to  perform  it  more  readily,  and  with  the  least  pain  possible 
to  the  dog.  If  you  are  situated  so  that  you  cannot  secure  the  veterinary, 
first  examine  and  determine  in  what  direction  the  bone  is  parted  from  its 
socket;  for  instance,  in  dislocation  of  the  hip,  the  head  of  the  thigh  bone 
is  generally  carried  upwards  and  backwards,  this  being  apparent  to  the 
eye,  as  the  injured  side  is  thereby  made  higher  and  can  readily  be  felt. 
Have  an  assistant  to  hold  the  dog  around  the  loins  steady  in  one  position, 
while  you  take  hold  of  the  dislocated  limb  above  the  stifle  joint,  which  will 
retract  the  thigh  bone  downward  and  forward.  In  similar  operations  you 
must  be  guided  by  the  same  principle.  Rest  will  be  needed  for  the  pa- 
tient, and  violent  exercise  must  not  be  allowed  for  some  time.  There  is 
always  a  disposition  to  a  repetition  of  a  dislocation. 

Dropsy. — This  is  an  unnatural  accumulation,  of  water  in  different  parts 
of  the  body,  as  in  water  on  the  brain,  dropsy  of  the  chest,  dropsy  of  the 
skin,  and  dropsy  of  the  belly;  and  it  is  the  last-named  to  which  the  dog 
is  most  liable.  Dropsy  is  generally,  if  not  always,  the  result  of  some  other 
debilitating  disease,  and  especially  of  inflammatory  disorders;  but  it  may 
be  brought  on  by  unsuitable  diet,  or  by  the  abuse  of  drastic  purgatives. 
With  the  development  of  shows  a  new  danger  has  sprung  up,  as  dogs  are 
too  often  kept  on  their  benches  to  the  suppression  of  the  discharge  of  thf' 
excretions,  which  is  a  recognized  caused  of  inducing  dropsy.  Dropsy  of  the 
belly  need  not  in  the  bitch  be  mistaken  for  pregnacy,  for  in  the  latter 
the  teats  enlarge  with  the  belly,  which  is  altogether  firmer,  and  does  not 
droop  until  just  before  whelping,  while  the  puppies  can  be  felt  through  the 
abdominal  walls.  In  dropsy  the  belly  is  more  pendulous  and  baggy,  the 
back  is  arched,  and  the  water  moves  readily  under  pressure;  the  dropsical 
animal,  too,  is  generally  poor  in  flesh  and  harsh  in  coat.  The  medicines 
principally  employed  in  dropsy  are  iodine,  iron  and  other  mineral  tonics, 


fiO  DISEASES 

with  digitalis  and  diuretics;  5  to  15  drops  of  benzoate  of  ammonium,  or 
1  to  3  drops  of  oil  of  juniper,  with  5  to  20  drops  of  tincture  of  nux  vomica, 
in  water,  three  times  a  day,  are  also  useful  in  treating  the  disease  which, 
however,  is  always  best  left  to  a  veterinary  surgeon. 

Dyspepsia. — See  Indigestion. 

Diabetes. — This  is  an  increased  abnormal  flow  of  urine,  the  cause 
being  a  derangement  of  some  of  the  assimilative  organs,  and  when  long 
established  producing  great  emaciation  and  weakness.  First,  give  a  few 
doses  of  mild  purgative,  of  the  "podophyllin  pills." 

Podolphyllin    3  grains 

Compound  extract  of  colocynth   15  grains 

Powdered    rhubarb    24  grains 

Extract  of  henbane 18  grains 

Mix  and  divide  into  12  pills.  Dose  one  or  two  pills,  according  to  size  of 
dog.     One  or  two  doses  probably  enough,  if  it  moves  the  bowels. 

To  allay  the  thirst,  always  present  in  diabetes,  give  (twice  a  day)  5 
to  30  drops  (according  to  size  of  dog)  of  phosphoric  acid,  largely  diluted 
with  water,  and-  to  strengthen  the  system,  2  to  5  grains  of  sulphate  of  iron 
twice  a  day  in  water.  If  the  excessive  flow  of  urine  continues  after  this, 
then  use  the  following. 

Astringent  Bolus  for  Diabetes — Take 

Gallic    acid    1  dram 

Powdered  alum    1   dram 

Powdered   opium    12   grains 

Gum  sufficient  to  form  a  mass;  divide  into  24  pills.  Dose  for  a  25-lb.  to 
50-lb.  dog,  one  pill  twice  a  day.  Small  toy  dogs,  one-half  pill.  And  larger 
than  50-lb.,  1  x/2  pill  as  a  dose.  Where  the  dog  is  weak  and  his  appetite 
impaired,  have  druggist  add  one  grain  of  quinine  to  each  pill  when  filling 
prescription. 

Another  case  was  prescribed  for  as  follows: 

"My  Cocker  bitch  drinks  a  great  deal  more  water  than  two  or  three 
of  my  other  dogs  drink,  and  she  also  passes  a  great  deal  of  water — more 
than  any  of  my  other  dogs.     Will  you  advise  me  what  to  do? 

From  symptoms  you  mention  the  dog  probably  has  diabetes.  Give 
some  mild  purgative  for  a  few  days.  To  allay  the  thirst  give  twice  a  day 
5  to  30  drops  (according  to  size  of  dog)  of  phosphoric  acid  largely  diluted 
with  water.  A  dose  of  sulphate  of  iron,  2  to  5  grains,  twice  a  day  will 
tone  up  the  system.  If  the  excessive  flow  continues  after  this  treatment 
use  the  following  prescription:  Gallic  acid  (one  dram),  powdered  alum 
(one  dram),  powdered  opium   (12  grains),  gum  sufficient  to  form  a  mass, 


DISEASES  61 

and  divide  into  24  pills.  For  dogs  25  to  50  pounds  in  weight  give  one 
pill  twice  a  day;  Toy  dogs,  one-half  pill.  Twenty-four  grains  quinine 
added  to  the  prescription  will  be  of  value  if  the  dog  is  weak  or  appetite 
impaired." 

The  following,  from  Field  and  Fancy,  is  also  valuable  advice: 

"Diabetes  is  characterized  by  an  abnormal  flow  of  urine,  caused  by 
derangement  of  some  of  the  assimilative  organs;  when  long  established 
it  produces  great  emaciation  and  weakness.  The  treatment  consists  in  giv- 
ing first  a  few  doses  of  a  mild  purgative,  such  as  the  podophyllin  pills. 
To  allay  the  thirst,  which  is  always  present  in  diabetes,  give  twice  a 
day  5  to  30  droys  of  phosphoric  acid,  largely  diluted  with  water,  and  to 
strengthen  the  system  2  gr.  to  5  gr.  of  suphate  of  iron  twice  a  day  in 
water.  If  the  excessive  flow  of  urine  continues  after  this  treatment,  resort 
must  be  had  to  opium,  iodine,  alum,  oak-bark,  or  its  preparations.  The 
following  bolus  may  prove  useful  in  such  cases: 

Astringent  Bolus  for  Diabetes. — Take  gallic  acid,  1  dr.;  powdered  alum, 
1  dr.;  powdered  opium,  12  gr. ;  gum  sufficient  to  form  a  mass;  divide 
into  twenty-four  pills.  Dose  for  a  twenty  pound  dog,  one  twice  a  day. 
Where  the  animal  is  weak  and  the  appetite  impaired,  1  gr.  of  quinine  may 
be  added   to  each  pill." 

Diptheria. — Some  veterinarians  hold  that  dogs  are  liable  to  this  alarm- 
ing and  fatal  disease.  At  the  slightest  suspicion  of  diphtheria,  isolate  the 
patient,  as  it  is  contagious,  and  call  in  a  veterinary  surgeon  at  once. 

I  have  never  had  a  case  of  diphtheria  as  yet  in  any  of  my  dogs,  but 
should  I  have,  would  at  once  call  in  a  good  doctor  or  veterinarian.  This 
disease  should  be  treated  the  same  as  if  in  a  person. 

Dent,  at  my  request,  furnishes  the  following  article  on  this  disease: 

"There*  has  been  considerable  discussion  over  this  disease,  which  is 
so  alarming  in  the  human  family.  While  some  veterinarians  hold  that 
this  disease  does  not  exist  in  dogs,  others  contend  as  religiously  that  it  does. 

"There  are  cases  on  record  where  a  dog  has  contracted  the  disease 
from  eating  the  food  that  had  previously  been  placed  before  an  affected 
child,  and  it  is  reasonable  to  presume  that  the  disease  is  communicable 
from  man  to  dog,  and  vice  versa,  when  we  consider  the  intimate  terms  under 
which   they  exist. 

"The  cause  of  this  disease  in  the  dog,  as  in  man,  is  a  specific  germ 
which  attacks  the  throat,  or  nose,  or  both  and  extends  from  them  down 
into  the  wind  pipe. 

"Symptoms. — Difficulty  in  swallowing,  more  or  less  difficulty  in  breath- 
ing,  chills,  fever,  marked  debility  and  exhaustion. 

"Treatment. — The  slightest  suspicion  of  this  disease  calls  for  isolation, 
increased  attention  to  sanitation,  careful  disinfection,  and  the  attenton  of  a 
skillful  veterinarian,  who  should  use  antitoxin  exactly  as  used  in  human 
practice.  Feed  easily  digested  food,  and  as  the  animal  passes  the  critical 
period  and  approaches  convalescene,  use  a  good  tonic  condition  pill,  any 
of  thoso  advertised  in  this  book." 


62  DISEASES 

Deafness. — A  very  considerable  number  of  dogs  suffer  from  deafness. 
In  many  the  disease  is  congenital,  but  I  do  not  know  that  it  is  hereditary; 
and  I  am  quite  at  a  loss  to  explain  why  congenital  deafness  is  so  much 
oftener  seen  in  white  dogs,  or  those  with  a  preponderance  of  white,  than 
in  those  of  any  other  color.  Bulldogs,  bull  terriers  and  white  English 
terriers  seem  to  be  peculiarly  liable  to  this  defect.  Deafness  is  also  fre- 
quently caused  by  accumulations  of  wax  and  this  can  be  removed  by  syring- 
ing the  ear  daily  with  1  part  of  spirits  of  wine  and  20  parts  of  warm  water, 
afterwards  drying  the  ear  thoroughly,  by  means  of  a  piece  of  wool  rolled 
upon  a  probe  or  pointed  piece  of  stick.  Several  fresh  pieces  of  wool  will  be 
necessary.     Canker  is  also  a  fruitful  cause  of  deafness. 

I  know  of  no  treatment  for  congenital  deafness  likely  to  be  of  any 
use  except  when  it  is  caused  by  a  morbid  growth  capable  of  being  removed. 
Among  other  causes  producing  deafness,  blows  may  be  mentioned;  also 
lugging  at  the  ear — a  most  brutal  mode  of  punishment  often  resorted  to 
by  keepers  and  those  having  the  care  of  sporting  field  dogs — and  the  lodg- 
ment of  water  in  the  ear  cavity.  In  the  latter  case,  pouring  in  a  little  pure 
oil  of  sweet  almonds  may  give  relief;  and  in  the  other  cases  the  treatment 
recommended  for  internal  canker  may  be  beneficially  followed  with,  in 
addition,  the  application  of  a  blister  behind  the  ears.  Whilst  the  dog  is 
under  treatment,  cooling,  aperient  medicine  should  be  given,  and  a  light 
diet  with  green  vegetables  adopted.  You  will  find  that  dogs  born  deaf, 
like  a  deaf  and  dumb  person,  have  their  other  senses  quickened,  and  the 
dog  will  be  remarkably  sharp  at  interpreting  signs  given  by  the  master, 
who  should  adopt  a  system  of  signs  and  keep  to  them.  If  you  own  a  deaf 
dog,  you  should  have  an  enclosed  yard  for  him  so  no  danger  of  his  getting 
out  on  the  street  and  hurt  or  killed  by  a  passing  wagon  or  street  car — 
and  remember,  if  you  have  him  out  for  a  walk,  that  he  is  deaf,  so  that  no 
harm  befalls  him;  you  do  the  watching  out  in  this  case.  Deafness  does 
not  transmit — simply  happens — so  that  a  deaf  bitch  will  be  just  as  good 
to  use  for  breeding  purposes.  ■ 

Epilepsy. — Dogs  are  peculiarly  liable  to  this  trouble.  The  symptoms 
are  sudden  loss  of  sensation,  a  violent  convulsive  action  of  the  muscles, 
both  of  the  body  and  limbs,  champing  of  the  jaws  and  emission  of  froth 
from  the  mouth,  the  tongue  may  get  cut  by  the  involuntary  action  of  the 
jaw  and  being  tinged  with  blood  adds  to  the  fears  of  those  ignorant  of 
the  disease,  and  from  this  unfounded  alarm  the  dog  may  be  supposed  to 
be  mad  (?)  and  the  poor  fellow  killed.  See  treatment  under  head  of 
Epileptic  Fits. 

Eye,  Diseases  of  the Dogs  are  subject  to  all  eye  troubles  that  hu- 
mans are,  and  perhaps  more  so.  Eye  troubles  I  have  had  great  success 
in  treating,  and  when  I  see  them  appear  in  a  dog  I  am  not  at  all  worried. 
They  must  be  cared  for  at  once,  however.  Accidents  to  the  eye  are  not 
uncommon,  as  from  scratches  by  a  cat,  injuries  from- a  blow,  or  in  fighting. 
In  such  cases  the  first  thing  to  do  is  to  bathe  it  with  warm  water  for 
from  fifteen  to  thirty  minutes,  this  to  reduce  the  swelling  and  inflamma- 
tion which  follows.     If  the  injury  is  great,  a  veterinarian  had  best  be  called 


DISEASES  63 

in  but  otherwise  Eberhart's  Eye  Lotion,  "No    1"  or  "No.   2,"  can  be  used 
three  or  four  times  daily  with  good  results,  just  a  few  drops: 

Eberhart's  Eye  Lotion — No.    1. 

Cocaine     10   grains 

Sulphate   of   zinc    10   grains 

Rose  water,  imported    2  ounces 

Now,  as  to  the  above,  this  is  the  one  I  had  in  First  Edition  of  this 
book,  only  there  I  had  in  it  38  grains  of  cocaine,  instead  of  10  grains,  as 
in  this.  Under  the  old  formula  I  used  it  "for  years,  and  with  it  I  saved 
the  sight  of  hundreds  of- dogs. 

A  lady  living  near  New  York  had  a  Blenheim  spaniel  that  was  nearly 
blind  from  diseased  eyes.  She  took  it  to  a  celebrated  occulist  in  New  York, 
who  pronounced  it  a  hopeless  case,  telling  her  that-  the  dog  would  go  totally 
blind,  and  very  soon.  She  wrote  me  and  I  sent  her  this  prescription,  and 
in  a  couple  of  weeks  her  dog's  eyes  were  as  sound  and  well  as  any  dog's 
eyes  ever  were.  The  dog's  eyes  were  apparently  nearly  dropping  out  of  its 
head,  and  looked  as  if  you  could  knock  them  off  with  your  finger,  when 
she  took  him  to  this  eye  doctor.  When  she,  after  the  cure,  showed  the  dog 
to  the  doctor  he  could  hardly  believe  it  was  the  same  dog,  and  said:  "Well, 
it's  simply  wonderful." 

Now   here   is 

Eberhart's  Eye  Lotion  "No.  2." 

Acid    boracic     10  grains 

Cocaine     9  grains 

Sulphate  of  zinc    ". 2  grains 

Aqua    camphor     1  tablespoonful 

Aqua    rosa     1  tablespoonful 

Drop  in  eye,  a  few  drops,  two  or  three  times  daily. 

I  now  consider  "No.  2"  a  better  one  than  "No.  1,"  for  most  all  eye 
troubles,  and  have  used  it  for  several  years  instead  of  "No.  1."  It  can 
never  do  any  harm,  but  always  benefit.  This  one,  due  to  the  camphor 
water  in  it,  will  not  keep  well  for  over  a  few  weeks  or  so,  and  therefore 
should  this  be  remembered  and  not  used  when  having  stood  too  long. 
Either  should  be  always  tightly  corked,  and  a  glass  stoppered  bottle  is 
much  the  best.  Only  get  half  the  prescription  filled  at  a  time,  probably 
enough  for  the  case,  and  saves  extra  expense.  If  any  trouble  in  getting  it, 
I  can  sent  it  by  mail  for  sixty  cents. 

AVhenever  I  find  any  trouble  in  any  of  my.  dogs  eyes  I  at  once  use  the 
No.  2,  even  in  case  of  a  slight  cold  caught  and  which  had  settled  into  the 
eye,  as  shown  by  inflammation,  mattery  or  watery  discharge,  or  even  only 
an  apparent  weakness  or  blinking  when  dog  was  exposed  to  a  strong  light. 
In  such   cases,  bathing   the  eyes   first,   with   a   Boracic  Acid  solution,    (how 


64  DISEASES 

to  make  is  given  under  that  heading),  see  index,  just  a  couple  drops  twice 
a   day,   is  required. 

Pugs,  toy  spaniels  and  all  dogs  with  prominent  or  "pop  eyes,"  as 
they  are  termed,  are  greatly  troubled  with  their  eyes,  and  here  is  where 
I  found  out  the  merits  of  my  own  eye  remedies. 

You  may  discover  some  morning  the  eye  of  your  dog  covered  with 
a  blue  film,  this  is  so  common  in  pop  eyed  dogs  that  I  named  it  "blue  eye" 
for  short.  Very  rapidly  this  eye,  the  ball,  will  enlarge,  and  if  not  promptly 
treated  will  assume  proportions  that  are  apparently  startling,  and  in  a 
few  days  if  not  taken  care  of,  the  ball  of  the  eye  would  bulge  out  so  much 
that  it  would  seem  as  if  it  would  drop  out  of  its  head.  Don't  be  alarmed, 
for  my  lotion  "No.  2"  will  take  care  of  this,  will  cure  the  eye,  which 
in  due  time  will  be  sound  as  ever,  the  same  as  it  was  before  this  trouble 
appeared,  and  the  sight  saved,  as  perfect  as  ever.  No.  2  will  never  fail  to 
cure  ulceration  and  perforation  of  the  ball  of  the  eye  if  used  in  time.  In 
some  cases  a  white  spot  or  speck  will  remain,  but  the  sight  is  all  right, 
and  to  remove  this  spot  use  the  following: 

Eye  Salve. 

Vaseline    1   ounce 

Yellow  oxide  of  mercury    2   grains 

Mix,  use  daily,  putting  inside  the  eye  a  portion  about  the  size  of  a  pea, 
then  closing  the  eye  rub  it  gently.  This  prescription  should  be 
thoroughly  and  carefully  mixed  by  your  druggist.  This  is  very  im- 
portant- 

In  other  cases  the  "No.  2"  has  done  all  the  curing,  and  there  was  no 
white  spot  left.  Due  to  the  present  stringent  laws  in  many  states  as  to 
narcotics,  it  will  be  necessary  to  have  your  doctor  write  this  prescription 
because  of  the  cocaine  in  it.  Where  I  'discovered"  this  "No.  2"  was  in 
the  case  of  a  Pug  dog  I  had  bought,  that  when  I  received  her  from  the 
express  company,  had  gotten  this  on  her  long  trip,  and  I  at  once  took  her 
to  my  own  eye  doctor,  Dr.  Robert  C.  Heflebower,  (now  one  of  the  greatest, 
if  not  the  greatest,  eye  specialist  in  the  .world,  today.  My  bill  with  him 
for  this  dog  was  eighteen  dollars),  and  now  with  "No.  2"  it  can  be  cured 
for  less  than  a  dollar.  I  consider  this  "No.  2"  worth  more  than  twenty 
times  the  cost  of  a  copy  of  this  book. 

Dogs  are  subject  to  affections  of  the  eye  in  more  or  less  degree  ac- 
cording to  their  breed  and  uses.  Hunting  dogs  are  naturally,  owing  to  the 
nature  of  their  work,  more  subject  than  other  dogs  to  receive  injuries 
from  thorns,  dust  and  dirt  and  other  foreign  matter.  This  will  be  followed 
by  more  or  less  inflammation  of  the  mucous  membrane  lining  the  eye- 
lids, which  is  attended  by  a  watery  discharge  at  first  and  assuming  a  more 
purulent  condition  as  the  trouble  increases. 

It  is  well  known  that  a  small  particle  of  grit  may  remain  under  an 
eyelid  in  spite  of  fomentations,  and  should  the  eye  be  examined  without 
discovery  of  the  source  of  trouble,  very  often  an  application  of  pure  olive 
oil  with  a   camel's  hair  brush   to   the   underpart  of  the   eyelid   Avill   often 


DISEASES  G5 

succeed  in  carrying  off  the  irritant,  which  may  be  too  small  to  discern. 
This,  however,  is  usually  to  be  considered  merely  a  preliminary  step,  and 
my  Eye  Lotion  No.  2  should  be  then  used  to  remove  the  inflammation  thus 
caused.  If  your  dog  brings  about  a  swollen  or  inflamed  condition  of  the 
eyelids  through  a  chance  scratch  of  the  claws  in  rubbing  their  face,  use 
my  Eye  Lotion  No.  2,  after  having  first  bathed  the  parts  with  warm  water. 
Different  form  of  indigestion  may  be  associated  with  irritation  of  the 
mucous  membranes  throughout,  and  the  eyes  will  suffer  in  common  with 
the  other  parts.  Rheumatism  is  also  one  of  the  maladies  which  are  at- 
tended with  inflammation,  more  or  less  pronounced,  of  the  eyes,  with  the 
eyeball  itself  and  the  lids  participating  in  the  disorder.  It  must,  therefore, 
be  obvious  that  the  common  expression,  "a  discharge  from  the«eyes,"  may 
refer  to  a  variety  of  morbid  conditions  which  are  not  to  be  counteracted 
by  an  application  of  a  lotion  to  the  eye.  Perhaps  a  safe  guide  for  the 
tyro  in  medicine  may  be  found  in  the  duration  of  the  discharge.  In  any 
case  of  simple  irritation  from  the  presence  of  dirt  or  grit  it  may  be  fairly  ex- 
pected that  the  symptoms  will  cease  very  quickly  upon  the  application  of 
simple  remedies,  that  is  to  say  after  it  has  been  clearly  ascertained  that 
there  is  no  offending  body  adherent  to  the  underneath  part  of  the  eyelid. 
The  continuance  of  the  discharge  week  after  week,  or  even  month  after 
month,  may  certainly  be  taken  to  mean  that  something  more  than  ordinary 
irritation  of  a  simple  kind  is  present,  and  under  such  circumstances  the 
chances  are  that  the  common  eye  water,  for  example,  three  or  four  grains  of 
boracic  acid  in  an  ounce  of  rose  water,  for  example,  three  or  four  grains  of 
possibly  do  some  harm  by  checking  the  discharge,  which  is  really  critical 
in  its  character.  The  proper  course  in  such  cases  would  be  to  consult  an 
expert  in  diseases  of  the  dog,  who  will  most  probably  be  able  to  find  some 
constitutional  cause  to  account  for  what  has  been  looked  upon  as  a  local 
disorder. 

Eye,  Amaurosis  of  the. — This  is  a  loss  of  sight,  partial  or  entire,  arising 
from  one  of  several  causes;  the  optic  nerve  is  palsied,  which  may  have 
arisen  from  a  blow  near  the  eye.  Exhaustion  from  suckling  will  produce 
amaurosis  and  bitches  sometimes  exhibit  it  during  gestation;  excess  of  light 
is  also  a  cause.  The  eye  is  unnaturally  clear  and  glittering,  the  pupil  ex- 
panded and  fixed,  and  that  the  dog  is  partially  or  entirely  blind  is  seen  by 
his  stepping  high  and  with  needless  care  when  nothing  is  in  his  way  and 
running  against  things  that  are.  If  when  you  feint  a  blow  the  eye  does  not 
move,    total   blindness   may   be   assumed. 

Eberhart's  Eye  Lotion  No.  2  (See  Opthalmia)  may  do  a  lot  of  good  if 
used  at  once,  as  I  have  never  found  any  case  of  eye  trouble  that  it  did  not 
help  or  cure.  This  eye  lotion  should  not  be  kept  on  hand  very  long,  how- 
ever, as  the  camphor  water  in  it  destroys  its  virtues  after  a  time.  If  you 
find  the  trouble  due  to  a  deranged  nervous  system,  3  to  10  drops  of  tincture 
of  nux  vomica  in  a  little  water,  twice  daily  after  food,  is  useful. 

Eyeball,  Protrusion  of. — It  sometimes  occures  in  fighting  that  the  eye- 
ball is  forced  out  of  its  socket,  and  the  lid,  contracting,  prevents  its  return. 
I  cannot  recommend  the  amateur  to  attempt  to  return  the  eyeball  to  its 


6  6  DISEASES 

place,  but  the  veterinary  surgeon  should  be  sent  for,  and  in  the  meantime 
a  small  stream  of  lukewarm  water  should  be  kept  running  onto  the  part 
to  keep  the  muscles  relaxed  as  much  as  possible,  to  facilitate  the  necessary 
operations  in   returning  the  eyeball  to  its  place. 

Eyes,  Watery  or  Weeping. — This  trouble  seems  to  be  inherited  by 
some  breeds  of  dogs,  such  as  Italian  greyhounds,  Blenheim  spaniels,  Mal- 
tese terriers  and  white  Toy  poodles.  In  these  cases  a  strong  astringent 
will  do  harm  and  induce  inflammation.  Bathing  with  an  infusion  of  green 
tea  will  have  a  good  effect,  and  the  use  of  the  following  simple  eye  lotion 
will  do  much  good.  I  use  it  for  any  ordinary  inflammation  due  to  a  cold. 
Take  2  grams  of  ordinary  rochelle  salts  to  2  ounces  of  rose  water  and  drop 
in  eyes  twice  a  day.  Being  a  cheap  remedy,  I  also  bathe  the  eyes  with  it 
instead  of  water,  a  six  ounce  mixture  only  costing  a  dime  of  any  reasonable 
druggist.  This  weakness  may  arise  from  a  slight  inflammation.  A  purge 
if  the  dog  is  gross  and  fat,  and  you  can  use  the  following  Lotion  for  Weak 
Eyes: 

Sulphate  of  zinc '. 12   grains 

Laudanum    %    ounce 

Distilled    water 6   ounces 

Eyelids,  Inversion  of  the  Lower  Lid  of This  causes  serious  trouble, 

opthalmia,  etc.  An  operation  is  the  only  means  of  cure,  which  should  be 
performed  by  a  skilled  veterinarian,  as  in  unskilled  hands  serious  mischief 
would  arise.  A  piece  of  skin  is  removed  below  the  eye,  and  a  small  muscle 
which  is  responsible  for  the  turning  in  of  the  eye,  is  severed.  The  wound 
should  not  be  sutured,  but  allowed  to  heal  under  a.  scab,  which  helps  to 
pull  the  eyelid  outward  and  slightly  downward,  relieving  the  condition 
naturally. 

This  is  not  very  common  in  many  breeds,  but  in  some  breeds  that  have 
a  small,  deep  set-in  eye,,  as  Chow  Chows,  some  Terriers,  it  is  often  found. 
If  an  operation  is  decided  upon,  remember  the  danger  of  chloroform  if  it 
be  a  Chow  Chow.  I  have  a  Chow  that  has  had  this  trouble  in  both  eyes, 
for  two  years  that  I  showed  and  made  a  champion  of  during  this  time.  I 
had  my  own  eye  specialist  come  to  my  kennels  prepared  to  perforin  the 
operation,  and  after  a  look  at  the  dog  and  his  eyes,  said  to  me:  "I  am 
afraid  if  I  give  this  dog  chloroform,  that  it  will  mean  a  dead  dog,"  so 
the  doctor  did  not  operate.  He  told  me,  however,  to  slip  the  hairs  off  of 
the  eyelid,  and  paint  with  colodion  every  few  days,  under  the  eyes  across 
the  lid,  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch  wide;  also,  to  wash  away  the  whitish 
discharge  morning  and  night,  and  then  to  drop  in  the  eyes  a  few  drops  of 
the  following: 

Hydrastes 2   drams 

Camphor   water    G   drams 

Which  treatment  I  am  keeping  up  yet,  the  result  being  that  the  dog's 
sight  is  as  keen  and  perfect  as   ever,   and  bids  fair   to   continue  so.     The 


DISEASES  67 

colodion  dries  quickly,  and  then  after  dry,  I  put  a  second  coat  on  top  of 
the  first  one. 

* 
Eye  Iritis,  or  Inflammation  of  the  Iris,  is  sometimes  seen  in  dogs.     The 

iris  being  the  membrane  that  gives  the  color  to  the  eye,  in  the  center  of 

which  is  the  pupil.     Deep-seated  inflammation  is  usually  the  cause,   or  by 

direct   violence.      Symptoms   are   contraction   of   the   pupil,    which    does   not 

have  the  same  power  as  usual  of  contracting  and  dilating  to  regulate  the 

amount  of  light  to  be  admitted;   tears  flow  over  lid,  light  is  avoided,  and 

the  eye  is  bloodshot.      If  the  inflammation  increases  and  is  prolonged,  the 

usual   termination   would   be   suppuration    (formation   of   matter),   and   the 

loss  of  sight.     First  place  the  dog  in  a  darkened  kennel  or  room,  apply  hot 

fomentations   continuously  to   the   eye,   and   introduce  sulphate  of  atropine 

into  the  organ.     Discs  of  sulphate  of  atropine  you  can  get  at  your  druggist's, 

with  instructions  how  to  use. 

Eyelashes,  Turned  in. — This  occurs  occasionally,  the  eyelash  may  grow 
across  the  pupil,  interfering  with  the  dog's  comfort  and  vision.  In  ordi- 
nary cases  simply  clipping  with  the  scissors  will  do,  but  sometimes  excision 
and  cauterization  of  the  part  is  necessary.  Either  of  my  Eye  Lotions  to  be 
used  if  inflammation  is  present. 

Haw,  Enlargement  of. — The  haw,  or  third  eyelid,  as  it  is  sometimes 
called,  is  a  fold  of  membrane  situated  at  the  inner  corner  of  the  eye,  capable 
of  expansion,  and  is  used  to  sweep  across  the  globe  of  the  eye  to  cleanse  it 
from  flies,  dirt  or  other  foreign  bodies  that  have  blown  in.  This  membrane, 
from  constitutional  causes,  from  blows  or  irritation  from  extraneous  matter 
lodged  in  the  eye,  becomes  inflamed  and  enlarged,  which  interferes  with  the 
sight,  preventing  the  eyelids  from  closing.  My  Eye  Lotion  No.  2  would  do 
good  here  also,  the  treatment  being  astringent  lotions,  lunar  caustic,  or 
cutting  off  the  excrescent  growth,  according  to  the  circumstances  of  the  case. 

Eye,  Opthalmia  of  the — What  is  called  the  conjunctiva  is  the  mucous 
membrane  that  lines  the  inner  surface  of  the  eyelids,  and  as  its  name 
imports,  joints  these  with  the  eyeball,  and  opthalmia  is  an  inflammation 
of  this  mucous  membrane.  This  is  a  disease  unfortunately  common  in 
dogs;  it  varies  greatly  in  severity,  and  in  some  cases,  when  arising  from 
constitutional  causes,  becomes  chronic.  Sporting  dogs  have  been  said  to 
be  more  liable  to  it  than  other  breeds,  but  I  do  not  think  so,  and  I  believe 
the  idea  originated  from  the  fact  that  these  have  generally  been  more  ex- 
posed to  circumstances  exciting  it  than  other  breeds.  From  my  own  exper- 
ience, I  am  inclined  to  think  it  is  more  prevalent  in  pugs  and  other  pets 
overfed,  and  consequently  liable  to  frequent  derangement  of  the  digestive 
organs. 

Anything  that  will  set  up  local  irritation,  as  the  intrusion  of  dust,  flies, 
etc.,  or  the  scratch  of  a  cat,  or  a  blow,  exposure  to  sudden  and  extreme 
changes  of  temperature- — as  plunging  into  or  being  thrown  into  cold  water 
when  heated — and  excessive  exertion  is  occasionally  a  cause,  but  the  most 
common   sources   are   the   vapors   of   foul   kennels   or   hot   stables,   and   de- 


G8  DISEASES 

rangement  of  the  digestive  organs;  an  inverted  eyelash  may  occasion  it. 

Opthalmia  is  very  often  an  accompaniment  of  distemper.  There,  is  one 
form  of  disease  which  is  attended  with  considerable  discharge  from  the 
eyes  undoubtedly  possessing  contagious  qualities.  This  affection  is  known 
as  contagious  optbalmia.  Perhaps  the  most  marked  illustration  of  this  va- 
riety of  the  affection  in  the  dog  is  that  which  is  associated  with  distemper, 
and  it  may  be  noted  here  that  by  the  term  opthalmia  is  meant  the  disease 
which  implicates  the  eyeball  itself. 

The  symptoms  are  an  intolerance  of  light  and  a  watery  discharge, 
and  on  the  eyelids  being  opened  and  examined  there  is  seen  to  be  conges- 
tion of  the  lining  membrane,  and  across  the  cornea,  or  front  clear  portion 
of  the  eye,  there  are  red  streaks,  and  ulceration  soon  follows,  and  a  white 
film  abscures  the  eye  and  interferes  with  the  sight. 

More  or  less  opacity  of  the  cornea  is  one  of  the  symptoms  of  opthalmia 
either  of  the  simple  and  contagious  variety,  and,  in  the  case  of  the  dog 
affected  with  the  ophthalmia  of  distemper,  the  indications  are  of  a  most 
marked  character.  The  conjunctival  membrane  is  highly  injected  and 
reddened,  the  cornea  becomes  opaque  early  in  the  disease  and  very  fre- 
quently a  small  spot  of  ulceration  appears  in  the  center  of  it,  which  rapidly 
extends,  and  in  many  cases  penetrates  the  cornea,  completely  allowing 
the  fluid  in  the  anterior  chamber  of  the  eye  to  escape.  A  .profuse  dis- 
charge of  a  purulent  character  continues  during  the  whole  course  of  the 
disease,  and  one  of  the  annoying  features  of  the  complaint  is  the  glueing 
together  of  the  eyelids,  which  can  only  be  separated  by  very  careful  and 
continued   fomentations   of  warm  water   or,   what  is  better,   warm   milk. 

When  treating,  the  cause  should  be  first  sought  for,  and  if  it  is  some 
foreign  irritating  body,  or  an  eyelash  growing  in  a  wrong  direction,  these 
should  be  removed.  A  mild  dose  of  cooling  aperient  medicine  should  be 
given,  and  the  eye  should  be  well  and  frequently  bathed  with  a  decoction 
of  poppy  heads;  and  afterward,  if  the  inflammation  is  considerable,  the 
following   lotion   may   be   used   several   times  a   day   with   advantage: 

Eye  Lotion. — Extract  of  belladonna,  half  a  dram,  rose  water,  four 
ounces;"  wine  of  opium,  two  drams — mixed. 

Eye,  Cataract  of  the — This  is  an  opacity  of  the  eyeball,  a  whitish, 
opaque  spot,  which  gradually  enlarges  and  has  generally  ended  in  blind- 
ness. It  is  supposed  to  be  incurable  by  our  best  authorities,  generally 
occurring  in  aged  dogs — these  are  evidences  of  failing  health  and  probable 
breaking  up  of  the  system.  It  frequently  follows  ophtalmia,  but  might  be 
the  result  of  inflammation  or  a  wound,  or  blow.  My  Eye  Lotion  No.  2 
will   do  some  good   even   in  such   cases. 

Ear  Canker,  Internal. — There  are  two  forms  of  this  disease,  internal 
and  external,  the  latter  generally  the  result  of  the  former.  I  will  first 
prescribe  for  internal.  Canker  is  a  term  generally  applied  to  different 
obstinate,  corroding,  or  heating  humors,  horses  having  it  in  the  feet, 
sheep  having  "foot  rot;"  but  unless  the  irritation  is  caused  in  the  foot 
of  the  dog,  sometimes  by  hard  running  on  rough  ground,  causing  canker- 


DISEASES  69 

ous  sores,  and  which  should  be  treated  the  same  as  internal  ear  canker, 
it  is  not  found  in  dogs  except  in  the  ear. 

Causes. — First  of  all,  and  most  common,  is  some  injury,  such  as  blows 
on  the  ear  or  pulling  the  ears,  a  habit  some  people  have  as  a  method  of 
correction,  and  one  that  is  most  pernicious.  Others,  of  which  probably 
the  principal  one  is  getting  the  cars  full  of  water  in  diving,  swimming  or 
retrieving  from  water,  followed  by  lack  of  exercise;  too  rich  food,  dirty, 
damp  kennel  to  sleep  in,  and  excess  of  fat,  as  it  is  often  found  in  fat,  lazy 
dogs. 

Canker  may  be  the  result  of  exposure  to  cold,  over-feeding,  the  pres 
ence  of  insects;  foreign  bodies,  or  an  accumulation  of  wax  in  the  ear,  are 
also  fertile  causes,  while  the  most  common  is  the  washing  of  dogs  with 
coarse  alkaline  soaps  which  are  totally  unfit  for  the  sensitive  skin  of  the 
dog.  The  soap,  during  the  washing,  gains  access  to  the  ear,  setting  up 
dangerous   inflammation. 

Hugh  Dalziel  says:  "Is  there  not  another  and  frequent  cause — whether 
those  sportsmen  (?)  do  not  often  produce  it  who,  instead  of  correcting 
their  dogs  by  the  legitimate  means  of  the  voice  and  the  whip,  resort 
to  another  method  much  to  be  condemned.  'Lugging'  a  dog  is  as  cruel 
as  kicking  him,  neither  is  a  fit  mode  of  punishment  and  the  former 
very   likely  to   produce   canker." 

Ear  canker  is  one  of  the  nuisances  of  dog  keeping,  and  when  neg- 
lected is  a  most  obstinate  complaint.  The  experienced  dogman  is  always 
on  the  alert,  but  the  novice  may  not  detect  the  trouble  until  the  ear 
discharges  an  acrid  secretion.  The  careful  kennelman  will  examine  his 
dogs'  ears  as  a  part  of  the  daily  grooming. 

Internal  Canker  is  an  inflammation  of  the  lining  membrane  of  the 
passage  to  the  ear,  which  if  neglected  turns  into  ulceration  and  suppuration, 
and  when  of  long  standing  a  blackish,  offensive  discharge  takes  place, 
accumulating  in  the  air  passage,  and  the  interior  of  the  ear  will  be  found 
red  and  inflamed. 

When  you  notice  the  following  symptoms  begin  at  once  to  treat  him 
for  it,  the  sooner  the  better,  to  save  your  dog  pain  and  yourself  trouble: 

The  dog  thus  suffering  will  be  observed  frequently  scratching  his  ear 
with  his  paw,  holding  his  head  on  one  side,  giving  it  a  violent  shake,  as 
though  to  empty  something  out,  the  pain  and  irritation,  causing  him,  to 
thus  shake  his  head,  whereby  the  flaps  of  they  ear  get  bruised,  ulcerations 
form,  the  tips  become  sore,  the  inflammation  in  the  interior  lining  mem- 
brane extends  to  the  outside  and  from  the  shaking  and  scratching  is  formed 
external  canker. 

When  a  dog  shakes  his  head,  scratches  his  ear  with  his  paw,  and 
holds  his  head  to  one  side,  it  is  high  time  to  investigate  and  apply  remedies. 

The  acrid  discharges,  if  not  cleared  away  will  lead  to  irritation  of 
the  flap  of  the  ear,  the  flap  swells  and  looks  angry,  often  breaking  out  in 
sores  at  the  tips  and  edges.  This  is  external  canker.  The  peculiarly  of- 
fensive odor   of  the  ear  passage  is  a  sure  sign   of  internal  canker. 

Treatment. — Wash  out  the  ear  with  warm  water  and  soapsuds,  use 
either  Castile  or  Eberhart's  Dog  Soap;  rinse  with  clean  warm,  water  and 


70  DISEASES 

peroxyde  of  hydrogen,  one  part  of  peroxyde  to  four  parts  of  water  by 
measure. 

Dry  out  the  ear  with  absorbent  cotton  swabs  made  by  rolling  cotton 
loosely  on  a  skewer  or  clean  piece  of  stick.     Dry  thoroughly. 

The  ear  is  now  ready  for  treatment,  and  here  is  my  remedy  which  has 
never  failed  to  cure  the  most  obstinate  cases.,  even  of  long  standing,  and 
I  give  this  as  having  proved  to  be  an  infallible  cure. 

I  cured  a  valuable  poodle  that  had  a  bad  case  in  both  ears  for  a 
year;  three  veterinarians  having  treated  the  dog  and  failed  to  cure  him. 
The  dog  was  then  shipped  to  my  kennels  and  I  sent  him  back  in  a  few 
weeks  entirely  cured.  This  was  the  worst  case  I  ever  saw  or  handled, 
and  I  cured  him  with  the  prescription  herewith  given: 

Iodine    16   grains 

Iodide  of  potassium    32   grains 

Mix  these  two  first  in  a  tablespoonful  of  water  and  then  add  one  pint 
of  pure  cider  vinegar.      Keep   in   bottle   corked   up. 

After  ear  has  been  cleaned  out  and  dried  as  directed,  take  your  dog 
and  lay  his  head  on  your  knee  and  pour  in  or  inject  with  a  rubber  syringe 
if  he  will  hold  still,  about  a  tablespoonful  of  the  remedy  into  the  ear  and 
gently  work  or  knead  it  in  for  a  few  minutes.  Do  this  once  a  day  only 
until  the  ear  gets  better,  and  then  every  other  day  is  often  enough.  You 
can  look  for  a  cure  of  ordinary  cases  in  a  week  or  less  if  treatment  was 
begun  promptly  at  first  signs,  neglected  cases  requiring  more  time. 

Here  are  several  other  good  remedies: 

Creolin 30  grains 

Sulphate  of  zinc ,  ,    16  grains 

Water    8  ounces 

This  one  should  be  injected  twice  daily  after  cleansing  the  ear  same 
as  |or  the  first  remedy  given. 

This  one  is  to  be  .used  three  times  a  day.  Cleanse  the  ear  with  in- 
jections of  equal  parts  of  peroxyde  of  hydrogen  and  water  three  timefe  a 
day,  then  injeet  two  t'easpoonfuls  of  the  following:  Sulphate  of  zinc  one 
dram,  sugar  of  lead  two  drams,  glycerine  two  ounces,  water  six  ounces. 

And  this  one  to  be  used  twice  a  day:  Sulphate  of  zinc  "ten  grains, 
acetate  of  lead  thirty  grains,  credlin  one-half  ounce,  glycerine  three  ounces, 
water  to  make  eight  ounces;  inject  a  tablespoonful  into  the  ear  twice  a 
day. 

The  discharge  from  the  ear  will  cause  sores  on  the  inside  of  flap,  so 
when  injecting  the  medicine  wash  these  sores  with  the  same.  My  iodine 
prescription  is  especially  good  for  these  sore  spots.  Injecting  with  rubber 
syringe  is  always  best,  if  your  dog  will  hold  quiet  and  not  resist  treatment, 
and  in  his  struggling  injurs  the  ear  from  the  syringe.  If  you  can't  con- 
trol and  keep  him  quiet,  then  pouring  it  in  will  do,  the  main  objection  being 


DISEASES  71 

medicine  wasted.  I  find  very  little  trouble  in  giving  any  dog  medicine 
for  I  go  at  him  easy  and  gently,  talking  to  him  and  thus  giving  him  to 
understand  that  his  doctor  is  his  friend.  There  are  few  dogs  that  you 
cannot  talk  to  and  reason  with,  kind  treatment  very  soon  winning  their 
confidence.  You  can,  of  course,  tell  when  ear  is  cured  as  the  discharge  and 
offensive  smell  ceases,  ear  looks  healthy  and  dog  has  stopped  scratching 
and  shaking  his  head. 

It  cannot 'be  too  firmly  insisted  upon  that,  whenever  a  dog  is  suffer- 
ing from  ear  canker  or  from  any  eruption  or  skin  disease,  it  is  quite  neces- 
sary to  give  a  good  internal  medicine  as  it  is  to  apply  a  suitable  external 
lotion.  The  only  blood  medicine  known  to  many  dog  fanciers  is  sulphur. 
A  new  prescription,  therefore,  may  not  be  out  of  place  here.  The  follow- 
ing may  be  made  up  into  pills,  and  will  prove  an  excellent  all-round 
tonic  and  blood  purifier.     Take  of: 

Sulphate  of  iron    (dried)    12   grains 

Sulphate    of   quinine    6   grains 

Bicarbonate  of  soda    (dried)    24   grains 

Liquorice    Root    Powder    and    Extract    of    Gentian — Sufficient    of    each    to 

form  a  suitable  mass. 

Divide  the  above  Into  twelve  pills,  one  of  which  morning  and  night 
will  do  for  a  dog  of  20  lbs.  More  or  less  in  proportion  for  other  dogs. 
Or  Dent's  or  Clayton's  Blood  Purifying  Pills  are  also  both  good  to  use, 
in  old  or  very  bad  cases.  This  cannot  be  done  with  one  box  perhaps,  any 
more  than  you  could  cure  yourself  with  a  single  bottle  of  spring  medi- 
cine if  your  blood  was  out  of  order,  so  keep  up  treatment  until  desired 
result  has  been  accomplished. 

Ear  Canker,  External. — This  generally  follows  or  appears  in  connec- 
tion with  internal  canker,  due  to  the  poisonous  discharge  from  ear,  caus- 
ing sores  on  the  flap  or  edges  of  ear.  The  tears  and  scratches  from  briars 
and  thorns  in  working  hunting  dogs  in  close  coverts,  if  not  given  attention, 
may  also  set  up  external  caker.  Exteral  canker  is  a  sore  or  sores  much 
of  the  nature  of  a  cancer,  a  sore  appearing  on  the  outside  or  inside  of 
the  ear  which  eats  a  hole  through  to  the  other  side  if-  not  arrested.  It 
is  much  harder  t©  cure  than  internal  canker.  It  often  exists  as  a  se- 
quence of  inflammation,  ulceration,  or  suppuration  of  the  internal  passage. 
External  canker  often  starts,  especially- in  hounds  and  pointers,  or  any 
long-eared  dogs,  with  a  small  sore  that  gradually  eats  into  the  flap  until 
it  makes  a  slit  in  the  ear  that  continues  to  grow  deeper,  and  will  be  per- 
haps a  quarter  inch  wide.  This  will  be  scabbed  over  on  edges  of  the  slit 
with  a  thin  scab,  bleeding  a  good  deal,  due  to  dog  c'ontin»allv  shaking  his 
head,-  Make  a  hood  or  cap  of  a  piece  of  canvas  of  sufficient  length  to 
reach  around  the  dog's  head,  having  two  pieces  of  tape  running  through 
a  hem  at  each  side  lengthwise,  by  which  you  can  draw  the  cap  tight  enough 
around  the  dogs'  neck  behind  tho  ears,  and  aga'n,  just  above  the  eyes, 
tying  them  underneath.  This  hood  or  cap  prevents  dog  from  irritating  the 
ears  by  flapping  them. 


72  DISEASES 

Treatment. — First  wash  and  dry  the  sores  nicely,  then  touch  the  sore 
edges  twice  a  day  with  following  solution:  Sulphate  of  copper  one  dram 
to  an  ounce  of  water.  Here  are  several  other  remedies:  Yellow  oxide 
of  mercury  15  grains  to  one  ounce  of  simple  ointment.  Mix,  and  use 
once  a  day  to  sores  after  having  first  cleaned  them.  Another  is,  if  any  of 
the  sores  look  "angry"  scrape  with  a  knife  a  little  blue  stone  into  fine 
powder  and  dust  the  ear  with  it;  or,  after  bathing  and  drying  nicely  touch 
them  with  a  point  of  lunar  caustic.  As  soon  as  you  have  cauterized  the 
sores  apply  a  damp  sponge  or  cloth. 

Quoting  Hugh  Dalziel: — "There  are  other  cases  where  the  whole  of 
the  external  ear  becomes  swollen  and  tender,  the  flap  thickened  and  filled 
with  fluid  between  the  skin  and  the  cartilage  or  gristle;  in  such  cases 
the  best  plan  is,  after  bathing  the  ears  well,  to  cut  them  with  a  lancet, 
press  out  the  bloody  matter,  and,  having  again  well  washed  and  softly 
dried  the  ears,  let  them  be  touched  with  the  following: 

Lead  Liniment. 

Goulard's  extract  of  lead    1   ounce 

Glycerine  and   carbolic  acid    %    ounce 

Finest  olive  oil    4  y2    ounces 

"Mix  the  two  first  named,  and  add  the  oil  gently,  rubbing  together 
in  a  mortar.  Shake  bottle  well  before  using.  In  getting  the  gly- 
cerine and  carbolic  acid  from  your  druggist,  I  mean  it  to  be  one 
part  pure  carbolic  acid  in  five  parts. 

"There  is  also  a  mangy  affection  of  the  ear  which  might  be  confounded 
with  external  canker;  in  such  cases  the  edges  of  the  ear  become  dry,  hot 
and  scaly,  and  hair  come  out,  but  this  is  not  ear  canker  and  should  be 
treated  as  mange  with  Eberhart's  Skin  Cure,  applying  it  twice  daily,  rub- 
bing it  on  until  ear  softens  up  and  gently  scraping  off  the  hair  with  the 
fingers." 

Enlarged  Joints — All  large  joints  are  not  diseased.  In  selecting  a 
pup  from  a  litter  the  big  jointed  ones  ore  to  be  preferred.  Enlarged  joints, 
from  the  want  of  the  hard,  earthy  materials  in  the  bone,  which  makes  them 
yielding,  so  that  they  cannot  support  the  weight  of  the  body,  consequently 
giving  away,  producing  deformity,  are,  however,  often  met  with,  caused 
generally  by  bad  food,  lack  of  good  water,  fresh  air  and  sunshine.  (See 
Rickets.) 

Ear,  Polypus  in  the — This  will  occur  sometimes  in  the  lining  mem- 
brane of  the  external  meatus.  Their  removal  should  be  left  to  the  vet- 
erinary surgeon. 

Ear,  Wax  Hardening  in  the Warm   water   injections   are   useful   and 

afterward   the  ear  should  be  carefully  dried;    or  better  yet,  glycerine  first 
put  in  hot  water  and  when  cool  enough  to  use,  inject  into  dog's  ear.     His 


DISEASES  73 

head  laid  flat  on  one  side.  Or,  a  little  oil  of  almonds  poured  into  the  caviy  is 
good.  Either  should  be  kept  up  daily  until  the  wax  is  softened.  Another 
good  thing  is  one  part  spirits  of  wine  to  twenty  parts  of  lukewarm  water. 
Dry  afterward  with  cotton-wool  rolled  around  a  probe  or  piece  of  pointed 

stick. 

Enteritis — (See   Bowels,    Inflammation   of.) 

Erythema. — A  superficial  inflammation  of  the  skin.  Dogs  occasionally 
have  it;  not  often  a  serious  matter,  though  at  times  quite  obstinate.  The 
skin  peels,  leaving  the  part  tender  and  sore.  The  mouth  is  often  the  seat 
of  the  disease,  and  the  skin  finally  becomes  wrinkled.  Administer  a  purga- 
tive and  bathe  the  parts  with  a  saturated  solution  of  boracic  acid  lotion 
(non-poisonous). 

Eczema. — This  is  not  contagious,  and  in  this  respect,  differs  from 
mange,  which  is.  It  is  a  constitutional  trouble  and  no  external  application 
alone  will  ever  cure  it,  and  you  simpy  waste  time  and  medicine  giving  ex- 
ternal treatment  alone,,  for  to  insure  a  cure  of  this  disease,  internal  and 
external  treatment  both  are  required.  Neither  must  you  expect  to  cure 
it  up  in  a  short  time,  which  you  ran  do  in  mange,  for  eczema  requires  time 
and  patience  on  your  part — and  the  proper  treatment.  The  blood  must  he 
purified,  and  you  know  that  if  you  yourself  were  "taking  a  spring  medicine 
for  a  general  cleaning  out  and  getting  your  blood  in  the  right  condition 
you  would  not  expect  to  do  it  on  one  single  bottle  of  Dr.  Somebody's  Sarsa- 
parilla.  Eczema  requires  a  proper  course  of  medicine,  but  can  be  cured.  In 
this  disease. the  hair  sacks  or  follicles  are  the  "principal  seat  of  the  dis3ase, 
becoming  inflamed,  and  if  the  animal  is  a  white  one  the  hair  assumes  a. 
rusty  or  reddish  color  at  the  roots.  The  inside  of  the  thighs,  back  of  the 
forelegs,  Hie  elbows  and  belly  art  the  parts  first  affected.  Prompt  means 
must  be  taken  at  this  tinr?  to  check  it  up  or  inflammation  increases  rapidly, 
and  the  entire  skin  and  subcutaneous  tissues  will  be  involved,  the  hair 
drops  out  from  the  affected  follicle,  purulent  matter  exudes  and  pustules 
form,  which  break  open,  the  matter  from  them  running  together  and  form- 
ing scabs,  which  crack  open  and  bleed,  and  the  animal  has  become  a  pitiful 
and  loathsome   object,   emitting   a   very   disagreeable   odor. 

In  my  forty  years'  experience  in  handling  dogs  I  have  found  at  least 
fifty  cases  of  eczema  to  one  of  mange.  Any  skin  trouble  appearing  on  a 
dog  the  first  conclusion  of  so  many  is  that  it  is  mange,  and  here  is  where 
the  mistake  often  comes  in.  Eczema  is  curable  in  a  dog  the  same  as  in 
a  human,  but  patience  and  regular,  persistent  treatment  must  be  expected 
to  be  given  the  patient. 

'  In  every  article  on  eczema  given  herein  Eberhart's  Skin  Cure  will  do 
the  work  externally,  and  nothing  more  certain  to  use  for  the  external  part 
of  the  treatment,  in  lieu  of  any  others  advised  in  either  of  the  articles.  It 
is  also  safe  and  non-poisonous. 

It  will  require  a  month  or  even  two  or  three  months'  treatment  to  effect 
a  cure  in  eczema,  but  if  you  follow  treatment,  and  keep  it  up  faithfully,  you 


74  DISEASES 

will  surely  be  rewarded  for  your  trouble  by  again  seeing  your  dog  as  lie 
should  be — in  his  usual  good  health  and  condition. 

A  couple  years  ago  I  found  out  something  new  to  use  internally,  for 
the  blood,  in  connection  with  my  skin  remedy,,  externally.  A  pure  white 
sulphur,  only  obtainable  of  a  homeopathic  druggist,  and  is  called — Sulphur 
12X.  I  succeeded  in  curing  up  several  cases  of  chronic  eczema  that  I  had 
failed  with  before.  One  was  a  Chow  Chow,  a  long-coated  dog,  that  was 
almost  bare  of  hair,  using  the  skin  remedy  once  a  day,  well  rubbed  in  with 
the  hands,  and  giving  him  morning  and  night,  mixed  in  his  food,  (as  it  is 
tasteless),  as  much  as  would  hold  on  a  silver  dime.  Sometimes  I  gave  it 
dry,  by  opening  mouth  and  dropping  it  well  back  on  his  tongue,  mornings, 
when  his  breakfast  was  dry  Spratt's  dog  cakes.  This  dogs  coat  came  out 
full,  this  part  mostly  due  to  my  skin  remedy,  which  is  a  hair  grower.  If 
no  homeopathic  druggist  in  your  town,  your  druggist  can  order  it  for  you, 
or,  you  can  get  it  from  me.  I  consider  this  valuable  treatment  for  eczema, 
as  so  far,  it  has  not  failed  to  cure. 

If  your  dog  has  skin  trouble,  find  out  whether  it  is  eczema,  or  one 
of  the  several  kinds  of  mange,  see  "Mange",. also. 

The  following,  on  eczema,  written  by  Dr.  F.  Holmes  Brown,  is  an  able 
article  on  this  subject: 

"Eczema  in  the  dog  manifests  many  of  the  same  signs  and  symptoms 
of  the  same  disease  found  in  man.  No  disease  in  the  whole  range  of  skin 
diseases  is  so  difficult  to  treat  properly.  In  eczema  in  the  dog  it  is  especially 
important  that  one  first  of  all  find  out  what  is  causing  the  disease,  then 
seek  to  remove  it.     In  that  way  only  can  we  hope  for  success. 

"Eczema  is  an  acute  or  chronic  catarrhal  inflammatory  disease  of  the 
skin.  In  the  dog  it  manifests  itself  in  two  separate  and  distinct  forms;  first, 
the  blotch  or  nervous  or  neurotic  form,  and  second,  the  red  mange  or  irri- 
tative form.  The  lesions  in  this  disease  vary  according  to  the  acting  cause, 
the  seat  of  the  disease  and  the  care  given  the  dog.  The  blotch  or  neurotic 
form  attaclfs  the  skin  on  the  head  and  along  the  back.  This  form  is  similar 
to  the  "milk  crust"  found  in  children,  and  li  due  to  much  the  same  causes. 
The  red  mange  is  that  form  in  which  the  skin  is  generally  red,  but  it  is 
more  visible  under  the  legs,  on  the  back  and  abdomen. 

"The  usual  form  of  eruption  in  canine  eczema  cinsists  of  a  large  num- 
ber of  small  water  pimples  or  vesicles  frequently  covering  a  large  extent 
of  skin.  These  are  formed  close  together,  forming  quite  large  water  blis- 
ters. When  opened  these  look  cellular  in  structure  from  the  many  small 
pimples  of  which  they  are  composed.  They  terminate  either  by  absorption 
or  rupture.  They  come  in  crops  and  remain  for  varying  periods  of  time. 
All  dogs  are  liable  to  attacks  of  this  disease.  Eczema  becomes  chronic 
after  repeated  attacks.  When  we  have  a  subdued  form,  there  is  a  greater 
tendency  to  crusting,  and  in  severe  cases  to  the  formation  of  pus.  In  the 
blotch,  lack  of  exercise,  constipation,  over-feeding,  injurious  foods  and 
indigestion  are  the  main  causes.  In  the  red  mange  form,  lack  of  assimila- 
tion, rheumatism,  gout,  and  external  irritation,  as  lice  and  ticks  act  as 
causes.  In  both  of  these  forms,  lack  of  exercise  is  one  of  the  most  impor- 
tant causes.  This  results  in  an  over-heated  blood  surcharged  with  the 
partly  assimilated  food,  and  in  nature  seek3  to  get  rid  of  this  excess  of 
effete  material  by  the  skin. 


DISEASES  75f 

"This  is  carried  off  by  the  exudation.  This  is  a  law  of  nature,  when 
the  ordinary  channels  are  clogged,  to  try  and  excrete  these  substances 
through  the  skin.  This  is  particularly  so  in  cases  due  to  rheumatism,  where 
nature  seeks  to  rid  the  system  of  the  excess  of  uric  acid  and  urates.  These 
substances  act  as  direct  irritants  to  the  skin,  and  set  up  a  catarrhal  inflam- 
mation. Washing  dogs  affected  with  eczema  is  to  be  avoided,  as  much  as 
possible,  as  both  water  and  soap  act  as  a  direct  irritant  to  the  already 
inflamed  skin.  The  sulphate  of  magnesia  or  soda  is  in  the  beginning  of 
treatment  of  great  value.  When  there  is  much  constitutional  disturbance, 
opium  and  calomel  in  grain  closes  are  indicated.  Benzoated  oxide  of  zinc 
ointment  in  the  milder  forms  is  of  great  benefit.  Tincture  of  arnica,  15 
to  20  grains  to  the  ounce,  of  an  oily  lotion  is  of  value.  Lotions  contain- 
ing salol  or  salicylic  acid  from  five  to  thirty  grains  to  the  ounce,  resorcin 
in  the  same  proportion.  Dusting  powders  composed  of  acetanilid,  salol, 
salicylic  acid,  or  resorcin  with  sterate  of  zinc  as  a  base,  is  of  value.  When 
disease  is  due  to  debility,  mineral  tonics  and  cod  liver  oil  should  be  given. 
When  the  disease  becomes  chronic,  stronger  remedies  must  be  used;  oint- 
ments containing  juniper  tar,  green  soap  and  sulphur  are  of  value.  The 
ointment  of  the  nitrate  and  ammoniate  of  mercury  are  much  used.  In 
cases  where  the  skin  is  especially  sensitive,  silver  nitrate,  1  grain  to  the 
ounce  of  water  will  often  effect  a  cure.  In  the  chronic  cases,  especially, 
iron,  arsenic,  calomel  and  quinine  are  to  be  used.  The  animal,  while  under- 
going treatment,  should  be  kept  clean,  and  give  plenty  of  exercise.  An 
eruption,  resembling  eczema,  may  be  induced  by  large  doses  of  mercury. 
The  skin  becomes  red  and  swollen,  then  forms  large  scales  and  hardens. 
This  eruption  is  generally  limited  to  the  limbs  and  scrotum.  Some  of  the 
symptoms  are  salivation,  loss  of  appetite,  eyelids  closed,  dullness,  offensive 
odor  from  the  skin,  and  rarely,  death." 

I  now  give  you  Dent's  article  on  Eczema,  written  expressly  for  thia 
book: 

"In  medical  nomenclature,  eczema  is  a  very  comprehensive  term.  It 
is  applied  to  all  diseases  of  the  skin  (except  true  mange  or  dog  itch),  and 
on  account  of  the  irritation  set  up  during  an  attack  of  mange,  it  is  generally 
complicated  with  eczema,  which  remains  to  annoy  the  dog  and  his  owner 
long  after  the  mange  mites  are  destroyed. 

"Dogs  are  particularly  subject  to  skin  diseases,  that  are  the  bane 
alike  of  the  breeder  keeping  a  large  number  of  dogs  in  kennels,  or  the 
single  house  pet.  While  true  dog  itch  is  common  enough,  ninety  per  cent 
of  all  skin  diseases  are  eczema. 

"There  is  a  close  relation  between  the  skin  of  the  dog  and  his  digestive  , 
organs,  and  a  deranged  stomach  will  quickly  find  expression  through  an 
eruption  of  the  skin;  any  poverty  or  plethoric  condition  of  the  blood  will 
also  be  expressed  in  the  same  way.  If  there  is  any  defect  or  unhealthy 
condition  of  the  digestive  tract,  and  it  is  called  upon  to  digest  unsuitable 
food,  it  is  only  a  question  of  time  before  poisons  are  introduced  into  the 
blood  that  will  produce  inflammation  and  eruptions  of  the  skin.  Strictly 
speaking,  eczema  is  an  inflammation  of  the  skin  due  to  the  causes  above 
mentioned,  and  numerous  others  such  as  old,  dirty,  damp  bedding,  lack  of 
exercise,  over-feeding,  starvation,  irritation  from  insects,  lice,  fleas  or  from 


?6  DISEASES 

true  mange.  In  most  cases  it  can  be  ascribed  to  a  disordered  condition  of 
the  blood  and  general  system. 

"Eczema  assumes  a  variety  of  forms.  In  one  very  common  form  there 
is  first  a  redness  of  the  entire  skin  with  a  dry  scaly  dandruff  that  flakes 
off.  In  another  form  there  is  an  eruption  of  small  distinct  pimples  or 
papules  that  do  not  always  break  but  can  be  easily  felt,  like  shot  under 
the  skin.  In  another  form  there  is  a  formation  of  scurvy  crusts  of  a  yel- 
lowish white  color  that  smells  like  mice,  and  underneath  this  crust  are 
small,    cup-shaped    ulcers. 

"Follicular  mange,  or  red  mange,  is  due  to  a  sort  of  vegetable  fungoid 
mite  that  lives  at  the  base 'of  the  hair  and  around  the  sebaceus  gland. 
It  turns  the  skin  a  sort  of  brownish  red,  kills  the  hair  root,  and  is  most 
commonly  found  along  the  back  near  the  root  of  the  tail. 

"In  the  commonest  form  of  eczema. there  will  first  be  noticed  a  patch 
on  some  part  of  the  dog's  body  that  is  inflamed  or  covered  with  pimples. 
These  pimples  increase  in  size  and  become  a  vesicle  filled  with  a  clear  tur- 
bulent or  purulent  fluid.  This  sore  breaks,  the  fluid  escapes,  runs  over 
the  skin  which  it  irritates,  and  dries  into  scabs  which  mat  the  hair  together. 
The  inflammation  affects  the  hair  follicle,  the  hair  drops  out  leaving  bare 
spots,  and  there  is  a  constant  exudate  of  matter,  which  spreads  and  forms 
more  hare  spots.  The  skin  becomes  ulcerated  or  thickened  and  wrinkled. 
The  dog  is  tormented  by  the  intolerable  itching  past  all  point  of  endur- 
ance, scratches  himself  until  he  bleeds,  cannot  sleep  or  eat,  gets  no  rest 
and  becomes  a  mere  wreck  of  his  former  self. 

"Treatment. — As  previously  stated,  eczema  and  inflammation  of  the 
skin  are  largely  due  to  constitutional  causes,  and  there  is  no  specific  treat- 
ment or  radical  cure  for  all  cases,  and  the  owner  must  exercise  his  power 
of  judgment  and  reason,  and  possibly  try  two  or  three  different  preparations 
before  effecting  a  cure. 

"The  following  course  must  be  pursued.  First  make  a  change  in  the 
animal's  diet  if  he  is  being  fed  on  grains  and  vegetables  with  little  or  no 
meat,  give  him  an  increased  amount  of  meat  both  lean  and  raw,  with  little 
or  no  bread  or  vegetables,  and  vice  versa.  If  the  dog  is  fat  and  plethoric, 
generally  prosperous,  and  inclined  to  be  constipated,  give  him  a  good  laxa- 
tive pill  every  night  and  fast  for  twenty-four  hours.  If  he  is  thin  and  un- 
thrifty give  cod  liver  oil  emulson  with  from  two  to  five  grains  of  the 
sulphate  or  iron  of  Sergeant's  Iron  and  Arsenic  Pills.  The  fat  plethoric 
dog  should  have  a  blood  purifying  and  cooling  pill  twice  a  day  for  some 
time.  Clayton's  Blood  Cooling  Pill  is  very  good,  or  the  following  prescrip- 
tion: 

Flower   of  sulphur    2   ounces 

Cream   of  tartar 3   ounces 

Bromide  of  potassium   3   drams 

Mix  and  divide  into  eighteen  powders  and  give  one  in  the  morning. 

"The  blood  purifying  and  cooling  pills  mentioned  are  th»  best  thing 
to   use,  handy  and  easier  to  give. 


f  DISEASES  77 

"Besides  the  mange  and  eczema  cures  on  the  market  the  following 
are  useful  in  cases  where  there  is  great  irritation  with  little  or  no  eruption: 

Plumbi   acet %  dram 

Soda  bibarat 1  %  drams 

Glycerin     2  ounces 

Aqua    camphor     , 8  ounces- 

Lanolin     4  ounces 

Lard     4  ounces 

Salicylic    acid     1  ounce 

Boracic   acid    1  ounce 

Apply  once  a  day  and  wash  every   week  and  repeat. 

Another  is: 

Carbolized    glycerin 1   ounce. 

Laudanum    2   ounces 

Carbonate  of  potash    2   drams 

Apply  all  over,  twice  a  day,  wash  twice  a  week. 

Another  is: 

Boracic   acid    1    ounce 

Salicyclic    acid     1  ounco 

Laudanum     1    ounce 

Whale    oil 14    ounces 

Apply  all  over  twice  a  day  and  wash  once  a  week  with  Eberhart's 
Soap." 

"The  Kennelman"  has  this  to  say  of  Eczema,  published  in  American 
Stock-Keeper: 

"Obstinate  cases  of  eczema  are  most  distressingly  aggravating  to  the 
kennel  owner.  In  a  majority  of  instances  this  condition  arises  from  the 
continued  use  of  starchy  foods.  When  I  he  symptoms  appear — pustulous 
formations  at  the  roots  af  the  hair,  after  a  preliminary  redness  of  the 
skin  and  wet  oozy  sores  that  appear  to  the  size  of  a  half  dollar  in  a  night, 
the  diet  should  be  attended  to.  Lean,  raw  meat  must  be  fed  almost  ex- 
clusively. Then  the  blood  must  be  purified,  and  exercise  given  freely.  A 
handy  preparation  that  will  be  found  excellent  as  a  general  cleanser  and 
preventive  is  a  mixture  of  equal  parts  (not  weights)  of  Epsom  salts,  cream 
of  tartar  and  sulphur  lac;  a  pinch  every  morning,  in  quantity  according 
to  the  size  of  the  dog,  dropped  on  the  tongue  for  a  week  will  do  good. 
It  is  a  remedial  agent  that  is  useful  at  any  time.  In  bad  chronic  cases 
this  mixture  will  do  well — one  drop  of  fluid  extract  of  colchicum  and  five 
grains  of  sulphate  of  soda,  three  times  daily  in  a  capsule;  feed  raw  beef 
and  no  cereal  food.  Apply  to  the  sores  equal  parts  of  oil  of  tar  and  alcohol, 
or  Eberhart's  Skin   Cure. 

"Another  good  thing  is  the  liver  of  sulphur  one  buys  in  pound  tins 


n  diseases 

(Sulph.  Potass).  Dissolve  a  teaspoonful  in  a  quart  of  warm  water  and 
apply  at  once  to  the  sores,  in  fact,  the  whole  body  should  be  covered  with 
it.  If  a  dip  is  required  for  several  dogs  make  the  solution  of  the  above 
proportions;  if  too  strong  the  hair  will  be  burned  off.  This  is  a  won- 
derfully good  remedy  for  puppy  rash  that  develops  often  after  puppies 
leave  the  mother;   and  if  the  puppy  licks  itself  all  the  better." 

Fatness,  Excessive. — This  should  never  exist  in  any  dog  and  need  not 
providing  it  has  been  fed  properly  and  sufficiently  exercised.  It  is  a  hard 
thing  to  do  to  reduce  a  dog,  especially  an  old  one,  after  it  has  been  allowed 
to  get  into  this  condition.  However,  some  dogs  are  predisposed  to  obesity, 
and  to  put  on  fat  even  when  on  a  meagre  diet;  such  being  the  case  with 
a  great  many  pugs  and  different  species  of  spaniels.  A  certain  amount  of 
fat  is  not  only  a  sign  of  health,  but  also  desirable,  as  it  is  the  store  of  fuel 
that  nature  lays  up  to  meet  future  exigencies;  but  an  excess  of  fat  con- 
stitutes a  morbid  and  diseased  state  of  the  body. 

A  .common  effect  of  excessive  fat  is  to  set  up  skin  disease,  with  dis- 
charge therefrom,  which  is  Nature's  means  of  ridding  the  system  of  the 
superfluous  matter.  Or  the  fat  accumulates  round  vital  organs,  interfering 
with  the  animal's  respiration,  making  the  breathing  labored,  wheezy,  and 
asthamatical,  painful  to  the  sufferer,  which  blows  and  pants  on  the  slightest 
extra  exertion,  and  most  distressing  to  the  owner.  In  bitches  not  allowed 
to  breed,  fat  accumulates  round  the  kidneys  and  ovaries;  the  heart  also 
becomes  surrounded  with  fat,  and  what  is  called  fatty  infiltration  or  fatty 
degeneration  ensues,  which  may  cause  sudden  death. 

Causes. — It  is  caused  by  confinement,  lack  of  exercise  and  an  over 
abundance  of  food  of  too  rich  a  quality  of  fat-producing  material.  Castrat- 
ing of  dogs  and  spaying  of  bitches — and  I  don't  believe  it  right  to  do  either 
— will  cause  accumulations  of  adipose  matter,  as  it  takes  from  the  dog 
one  of  the  organs  of  secretion,  and  all  dogs  that  refuse  sexual  connection 
will  become  obese.  All  dogs  should  be  allowed  Nature's  privilege  at  least 
a  few  times  during  their  lives. 

Treatment. — Give  a  brisk  purgative  two  or  three  times  a  week  and 
give  two  to  three  grains  of  the  iodide  of  potash  in  water  twice  a  day  after 
feeding.  Gradually  decrease  the  allowance  of  food  and  feed  only  stale 
bread,  dog  biscuit  or  crackers,  dry  if  they  will  eat  them,  if  not  moisten 
with  a  very  little  milk  or  thin  soup;  do  not  feed  grease,  fat,  potatoes  or 
sweets  of  any  kind.  As  the  food  is  decreased  slowly  increase  the  amount 
of  exercise,  and  as  the  animal  gradually  comes  into  form  omit  the  purga- 
tives and  feed  raw  lean  beef,  chopped  fine — gradually  increasing  the 
amount. 

Fleas. — These  are  familiar  to  every  one,  I  mean  the  fleas  that  are 
found  on  dogs,  and  no  description  is  really  necessary.  There  are  a  number 
of  good  remedies. 

"Eberhart's  Dog  Soap"  is  the  easiest  and  surest  remedy  for  fleas  of  any- 
thing made  and  much  less  trouble  to  use.  All  your  dog  needs  is  a  good 
shampoo  with  this  soap  swice,  twenty-four  hours  apart.  After  applying  it 
thoroughly  all  over  the  dog,  not  missing  a  spot,  or  you  leave  some  fleas 


DISEASES  79 

that  will  be  heard  from,  then  rinse  the  dog  in  lukewarm  water  and  dry 
thoroughly  with  rough  towels.  There  is,  however,  nothing — unless  you 
would  keep  some  preparation  on  the  dog  all  the  time  in  summer — that 
will  keep  fleas  off  of  a  dog  in  case  he  comes  in  contact  with  them  again,  as 
he  may  do  if  he  meets  another  dog  that  has  them,  when  your  dog  is  certain 
to  get  a  new  supply.  If  all  his  bedding  is  not  destroyed  while  being 
treated,  or  his  sleeping  box  not  thoroughly  disinfected,  he  will  again  get 
more  fleas.  The  best  plan  is  to  burn  all  the  bedding  he  has  used  in  his 
sleeping  box,  basket  or  kennel,  and  then  scrub  it  out  with  some  good  dis- 
infectant, getting  into  the  cracks  and  corners  with  Standard  Disinfectant, 
(see  advertisement  of  the  Standard  Disinfectant  Co.).,  which  will  do  the 
work.  Fleas  breed  every  twenty-four  hours,  so  that  in  using  my  soap  you 
must  give  the  second  bath  twenty-four  hours  later  to  destroy  the  young 
ones. 

Dogs  which  have  dense,  long  coats  are  subjects  of  special  delight  to 
the  fleas.  The  mouth  of  the  flea  is  specially  adapted  for  sucking;  the  wings 
are  rudimentary,  being  represented  by  four  minute  scales.  The  lavse  is 
a  footless  grub,  which,  in  about  twelve  days,  spins  a  "cocoon,"  (i.  e.,  an 
outer  covering  of  silky  hairs)  for  itself,  and  becomes  a  chrysalis,  from  which 
the  perfect  flea  emerges  in  about  a  fortnight  more. 

Here  are  also  some  home-made  remedies  that  you  can  try — they  will 
all  kill  fleas — but  my  soap  is  so  sure,  so  pleasant  to  use,  and  also  so  bene- 
ficial to  the  coat  that  it  seems  foolish  to  try  anything  else.  One  part  of 
oil  of  cloves  to  20  parts  of  methylated  spirit.  Directions:  Apply  all  over 
after  washing.  Or,  terebene  1  part,  glycerine  1  part,  methylated  spirits 
4  parts.  Apply  as  before.  Or,  a  lime  and  sulphur  lotion,  made  by  boiling 
16  ounces  of  sulphur  with  half  this  quantity  of  slacked  lime  in  a  gallon  of 
water,  the  whole  being  boiled  down  to  2  quarts  and  filtered.  Apply  a3 
above.  Or,  precipitated  sulphur  4  ounces,  powdered  camphor  1  ounce, 
powdered  resin  1  ounce,  terebene  1  dram.  Directions:  Mix;  dust  well 
into  the  hair. 

There  are  two  flea  powders  made,  both  are  very  good,  to  rid  .a  dog 
of  fleas,  if  you  prefer  a  powder  instead  of  a  liquid  remedy  as  is  often  de- 
sirable, especially  in  cold  weather,  to  avoid  the  danger  of  dog  catching 
cold.  Dr.  Clayton's,  (see  his  advertisement),  will  do  the  work,  if  used 
as  directed.  The  other  one  is  "Vermilax  Flea  Powder,"  considered  one 
of  the  best  made.  See  the  advertisement  of  Vermilax  Co.,  in  this  book. 
I  carry  this  Flea  Powder  in  stock,  and  can  send  it  by  mail  postpaid,  at 
thirty  cents  a  box. 

Fistula  in  Anus.— This  is  not  uncommon  in  pampered  and  over-fed 
dogs,  and  may  be  partial  or  complete.  It  usually  shows  as  an  opening  at 
the  sides  of  the  anus  .extending  upwards  to  the  gut,  where  it  can  be  seen; 
but  in  some  cases  there  is  no  external  opening.  It  is  caused  by  consti- 
pation, when  the  hardened  feces  abrade  the  surface  in  its  expulsion,  or 
neglected  piles,  resulting  in  ulceration;  or  fistula  of  the  anus  may  come 
from   a   wound   inflicted   on   the   part. 

Symptoms  of  Internal  Fistula. — The  dog  drags  himself  along  the 
ground,   and   the   voided   matter   is   highly   offensive  and   often .  covered   or 


sy  DISEASES 

streaked  with  blood  and  matter.  The  treatment  should  be  left  to  the 
veterinary  surgeon,  who  will  lay  the  sinug  open  and  apply  remedies  to 
set  up  healthy  action  and  close  it  up. 

Flatulency. — Is  not  very  common  in  adult  dogs,  but  oftener  met  with 
in  puppies.  It  is  unmistakable  evidence  of  indigestion.  For  immediate 
relief  the  treatment  should  consist  in  giving  to  a  20  lb.  dog  half  a  tea- 
spoonful  of  carbonate  of  magnesia,  large  dogs  a  teaspoonful,  in  a  little 
milk;  or  give  a  dose  of  castor  oil,  and  follow  with  5  gr.  to  15  gr.  of 
carbonate  of  bismuth  three  times  a  day  dry  upon  the  tongue.  For  per- 
manent  cure,    correct   the    indigestion.      See    Indigestion. 

Foreign  Bodies  in  the  Intestines. — This  is  another  cause  of  obstruc- 
tion in  the  bowels  to  which  dogs  are  peculiarly  liable.  Pieces  of  bone  "are 
swallowed  of  such  size  and  substance  that  they  pass  through  the  diges- 
tive organs  very  slightly  diminished,  and  getting  into  the  smaller  intestines, 
cannot  pass  farther,  so  that  feces  accumulate  and  harden  until,  if  not  re- 
lieved, inflammation  is  set  up.  Sometimes  stones  are  swallowed  and  cause 
obstruction,  and  this  will  at  once  demonstrate  the  danger  of  throwing 
stones  for  dogs  to  retrieve,  for,  in  their  eagerness,  they  are  apt  to  swallow 
them,  especially  if  small.  Wool  or  rabbit  fur  swallowed  is  likely  to  ball 
together  with  other  matter.     See  Obstruction  of  Bowels. 

False  Joint. — Is  found  where  limb  was  improperly  set,  or  the  dog  in 
unhealthy  condition.  It  is  the  non-union  of  the  bone  by  the  usual  osseous 
deposits,  instead  of  which  there  is  a  fibrous  connection,  the  union  of  the 
bones,  or  portions  of  them,  is  much  like  they  had  been  united  by  a  pi«ce 
of  India  rubber;  the  two  pieces  of  bone  can  be  readiiy  moved,  while  the 
limb  cannot  support  any  weight.  An  operation  is  often  attempted  to 
set  up  inflammation  of  the  parts,  and  induce  osserous  or  bony  deposits,  but 
experience  has  proven  such  operations  not  very  successful. 

Fatty  Degeneration  of  the  Heart. — Previous  to  making  a  brief  refer- 
ence to  this  diseased  state,  it  is  necessary  to  tell  the  reader  a  few  points 
of  importance  in  connection  with  the  healthy  heart  of  the  dog.  It  is  a 
hollow,  muscular  organ,  with  a  right  and  left  compartment  (the  ventricles). 
In  shape  it  is  like  a  cone,  th  apex  of  the  cone  pointing  downwards  and 
backwards.  The  base  is  made  up  of  two  compartments  of  the  body.  These 
large  vessels  serve  to  suspend  the  heart  in  the  chest  cavity,  says  Frank 
Townsend  Barton  in  British  Fancier. 

"The  blood  coming  from  these  vessels  first  of  all  passes  into  the  two 
compartments  at  the  base  (auricles),  and  from  these  through  valves  into 
the    compartments    first    mentioned,    and    called    the    ventricles. 

"The  weight  of  the  heart  varies  according  to  breed  and  age,  but  it 
has  been  estimated  that  it  runs  from  -3  to  7  per  cent  of  the  weight  of  the 
animal.  It  is  enclosed  in  a  bag  ,pericardium).  When  perfectly  healthy 
it  should  be  dark  red  in  color,  firm  to  the  touch  of  the  finger,  and  the  traces 
of  fat  running  down  the  various  grooves  upon  its  surface  are  a  sign  of  a 
well-nourished  orgaa. 


DISEASES  81 

"Now,  when  it  is  affected  by  what  is  called  fatty  degeneration,  it  be- 
comes very  pale,  thin  and  flabby,  greasy  to  the  touch,  with  one  or  more 
patches  of  fat  upon  the  walls  of  the  ventricles.  This  is  brought  about  by 
the  muscle  fibres  composing  the  heart  being  changed  or  replaced  by  fat. 

"In  order  to  bring  about  this  condition  the  dog  need  not  be  fat  itself; 
in  fact,  a  heart  in  this  state  is  far  more  likely  to  be  found  in  a  dog  which 
is    thin    or   underfed. 

"Dogs  which  are  excessively  fat  externaly  generally  show  the  same 
internally;  that  is  to  say,  that  the  heart,  kidneys,  liver,  etc.,  may  be  com- 
pletely imbedded  in  one  mass  of  fat;  but  then  it  must  be  understood  that 
this  is  not  a  diseased  state  and  does  not  interfere  with  the  animal's  health 
so  long  as  it  allows  these  different  organs  to  perform  their  work.  It  is 
a  sign  of  over  rather  than  one  of  under  nutrition. 

"The  fatty  degenerated  heart  is  a  diseased  one.  This  is  not  technical. 
It  is  called  an  'infiltration,'  a  term  which  means  that  fat  is  formed  be- 
tween  the  muscular  fibres. 

"I  am  not  aware  that  there  is  any  symptom  or  symptoms  during  life 
which  will  enable  us  to  tell  whether  the  heart  is  in  this  diseased  state. 
An  opinion  can  only  be  purely  speculative.  Of  course,  the  heart  has  a 
weak  beat,  and  the  animal  is  easily  knocked  out.  Sudden  death  is  likely 
to  occur  either  from  failure  of  the  heart's  action,  or,  if  the  fat  is  in  the 
form  of  a  patch  upon  the  wall,  from  sudden  rupture  of  the  wall  at  this  spot,, 
whereby  the  blood  would  gush  suddenly  out  of  the  heart  into  the  bag 
containing  it,  ceasing  to  beat  at  once. 

"The  animal  must  be  prevented  from  any  severe  exertion. 
"It   has   been    stated    that    this    disease   is   common    among    pampered, 
asthmatical  pets,  the  truth  of  which  is  open  to  serious  doubt." 

This  is  perhaps  the  most  frequent  form  of  heart  disease  found  in  the 
dog;  it  is,  however,  seldom  diagnosed  during  life.  A  postmortem  will 
show  in  such  cases  that  the  fibres  of  the  muscles  are  dotted  with  small 
dark. spots  (these  are  globules  of  oil  within  the  sheath  of  the  fibre),  the 
heart  tissue  is  soft  and  breaks  down  readily  under  the  finger.  Cause  may 
arise  from  a  general  malnutrition  of  the  system,  or  from  senile  decay  due 
to  old  age.  The  organ  not  always  wholly  involved,  and  when  only  a  part 
is   affected    it   is   due   to   some   obstruction,    causing   local   malnutrition. 

Warty  Growths  on  the  Valves  of  the  Heart. — The  valves  of  the  heart 
are  sometimes  the  seat  of  small  wart-like  growths.  When  a  dog  has  been 
a  constant  sufferer  from  rheumatism,  in  such  we  occasionally  meet  with 
these  growths.  Their  presence  may  prevent  the  valves  from  working: 
properly,  or  one  may  be  whipped  off,  and  thus  block  the  circulation. 
Sudden    death   may   occur. 

Evertion  should  be  avoided  as  much  as  possible;  but  this  stite  can 
only  be  surmised  during  life,   as  in   the  case  of  the  former  disease. 

Follicular  Mange — See  Mange. 

Founder  of  the  Chest — See   Kennel   Lameness. 

Fracture. — See   Bones   Broken. 


82  •        DISEASES 

Gastritis See  Stomach,  Inflammation  of 

Gatherings. — See  Abscess  and  Boils. 

Glass   Eye. — See   Amaruosis. 

Glossitis. — See  Tongue,   Inflammation   of 

Fractures. — While  fractures  are  not  of  frequent  occurrence  in  well- 
ordered  kennels,  they  belong  to  that  category  of  accidents  against  which 
there  is  sometimes  no  safeguard.  A  sudden  twist,  stopping  in  some  hid- 
den cavity  while  galloping  over  a  field,  jumping  a  fence,  or  from  a  car- 
riage (one  of  the  cleanest  breaks  of  a  hind  leg  occurred  to  a  foxterrier 
bitch  of  ours  while  jumping  off  the  carriage  seat  and  catching  her  hind 
leg  in  the  wire  rail  guard  at  the  end  of  the  seat),  so  one  never  knows 
when  such  accidents  will  happen.  Simple  fractures  are  so  termed  when 
a  bone  is  broken  into  two  pieces  only;  where  a  bone  is  broken  into  several 
pieces  it  is  termed  comminuted,  and  when  the  ends  of  the  broken  bone 
pierce  the  skin  it  is  a  compound  fracture,  which  is  the  worst  of  all  in  the 
piecing.  To  detect  a  simple  fracture  is  not  always  easy,  though  of 
course  the  other  two  conditions  are  more  or  less  self-evident.  In  the 
case  of  a  simple  fracture,  the  limb  should  be  taken  hold  of  above  the 
bruise  or  injury  with  one  hand  and  with  the  other  gently  move  the  lower 
portion  of  the  limb.  If  the  bone  or  bones  are  fractured  a  grating  noise 
will  be  heard  and  the  jar  of  the  broken  bone  can  be  felt. 

In  treating  this  condition  great  care  must  be  exercised  in  bringing 
the  broken  ends  together,  and  it  is  best  that  the  services  of  a  surgeon  be 
procured.  In  case  that  is  not  available,  or  a  home  cure  is  decided  upon, 
the  ends  of  the  fractured  bones  should  be  brought  opposite  each  other, 
and  then  splints,  well  secured  by  bandages,  must  be  applied  to  keep  them 
in  their  places  until  the  two  ends  are  joined.  This  is  generally  from 
three  to  four  weeks  in  the  case  of  a  puppy,  and  from  a  month  to  six 
weeks  in  a  matured  dog.  If  the  case  is  not  attended  to  immediately  after 
the  accident  the  parts  swell,  and  this  swelling  has  to  be  reduced  before 
any  attempt  can  be  made  to  set  the  bones,  and  cold  water  or  ice  applied 
to  the  swelling  will  easily  reduce  it.  Before  applying  the  splints  it  is 
necessary  to  wind  a  bandage  around  the  limb  two  or  three  times  from 
the  bottom  to  the  top,  as  this  has  the  effect  of  preventing  the  splints 
from  causing  unnecessary  irritation.  The  splints,  which  are  best  made 
of  wood  of  about  one-sixteenth  of  an  inch  in  thickness,  of  sufficient  length 
to  extend  over  the  whole  straight  surface  of  the  limb,  should  be  four  in 
number,  viz.,  one  for  the  front  of  the  leg,  one  for  the  back  and  one  for 
either  side  of  it,  and  they  should  be  just  wide  enough  to  cover  the  part 
of  the  leg  on  Which  they  are  placed.  Before  applying  them,  the  inside 
of  each  should  be  smeared  with  hot  pitch,  cobbler's  wax  or  some  such 
6ubstance,  so  that  they  will  adhere  to  the  bandage  and  not  slip,  and  then 
another  bandage,  which  should  be  of  considerable  length  (about  six  yards 
long)  and  one  inch  and  a  half  to  two  inches  wide,  and  which  has  been 
previously  soaked  in  a  thick  solution  of  gum  or  common  starch,  should  be 


DISEASES  83 

wound  round  the  limb  from  bottom  to  top.  The  object  of  the  starch  or 
gum  solution  is  to  give  additional  support,  which  it  does  when  it  gets  stiff 
and  hardens.  After  the  operation  the  dog  should  be  put  into  a  quiet  place 
— a  large  hamper  or  crate  does  very  well — so  that  he  can  rest  and  not 
move  about;  but  it  often  happens  that  the  next  day  the  part  of  the  limb 
below  the  bandage  is  found  to  be  swollen;  if  so  the  latter  should  be 
loosened  for  a  short  time,  but  it  must  be  tightened  again  when  the  swell- 
ing  subsides. 

The  above  treatment  is  of  course  only  advised  in  the  case  of  simple 
fractures  where  an  amateur  may  indulge  his  surgical  skill. 

Fits. — Dalziel  so  fully  and  ably  handles  this  subject  that  I  give  his 
article  entire,  as  it  covers  the  whole  ground.  I  have  been  governed  by 
his  ideas  in  treating  many  cases  and  the  success  I  had  leads  me  to  endorse 
his  treatment: 

"Fits  are  of  common  occurrence,  especially  in  puppies — fortunately 
those  that  are  of  a  dangerous  and  fatal  character  are  the  most  rare;  they 
often  cause  needless  alarm,  but  the  dog  suffering  from  a  fit  of  whatever 
kind  is  not  an  object  to  be  frightened  at,  but  to  be  commiserated  and 
helped,  and  this  requires  freedom  from  a  fear  for  which  there  is  no  just 
reason.  Fits  are  of  many  kinds,  and  may  be  classified  as  apoplectic  fits, 
distemper  fits,  fits  from  teething,  fits  from  worms,  and  suckling  fits,  and 
other  causes  of  excitement  are  known  to  produce  them,  even  high  notes 
of  music,  to  which  some  dogs  show  a  strong  objection  and  are  decidedly 
harmful. 

Apoplectic  Fits  are  caused  by  pressure  on  the  brain  from  distended 
blood-vessels  or  effusions  of  blood.  The  subjects  of  attack  are  generally 
those  dogs  that  are  kept  in  idleness  and  over-fed,  and  the  attack  may  be 
the  result  of  the  animal  over-loading  the  stomach  with  food  difficult  of 
digestion.  The  symptoms  are  loud,  labored  breathing;  the  dog  lies  mo- 
tionless on  its  side  in  a  state  of  insensibility — there  is  no  frothing  at 
the  mouth  or  champing  of  the  jaws,  but  the  eyes  are  fixed  and  often  blood- 
shot. Such  cases  are  usually  fatal,  and  death  is  frequently  instantan- 
eous. Prompt  bleeding  is  the  most  likely  means  of  saving  the  patient; 
and  then,  soon  as  sufficiently  recovered,  a  strong  purge  should  be  given, 
or  clysters  administered.  Should  these  means  prove  successful,  it  will 
be  necessary  to  use  extreme  care  to  prevent  a  recurrence  of  the  fit.  The 
dog's  diet  must  be  carefully  regulated,  sufficient  healthful  exercise  al- 
lowed, or  compelled,  if  need  be,  and  occasional  doses  of  cooling  medicine 
given.  Clayton's  or  Dent's  Blood  Cooling  Pills  will  be  just  the  thing  to 
give.     Apoplexy  in   the  dog  is  not  often  seen  in  practice. 

Distemper  Fits  are  caused  by  congestion  or  inflammation  of  the  brain, 
and  often  prove  fatal. 

Epileptic  Fits  are  not  dangerous,  but  of  very  common  occurrence, 
especially  during  the  heated  term,  and  generally  happen  when  the  dog  is 
at  exercise — sometimes  in  the  case  of  pointers  they  are  seized  when  on 


84  DISEASES 

the-  point,  doubtless  from  the  undue  excitement  produced.  When  the 
dog  is  attacked  he  is  first  observed  to  tremble  on  his  legs,  and  on  trying 
to  run  on  he  staggers  and  falls  down  on  his  side,  frequently  uttering  a 
low  moan.  Struggling  to  his  feet  he  attempts  to  move,  only  to  repeat  the 
fall,  when  he  lies  stupefied  and  insensible.  The  legs  and  the  whole  mus- 
cular system  are  violently  convulsed,  the  clog  froths  at  the  mouth,  the 
head  is  violently  moved,  often  knocked  against  the  ground,  the  jaws  are 
champed  together,  and  sometimes  the  tongue  gets  lacerated  between  the 
teeth,  and  the  froth  from  his  mouth  becomes  tinged  with  blood;  the 
breathing  during  the  fit  is  labored  and  irregular.  The  fit  generally  lasts 
several  minutes.  When  the  convulsions  have  subsided,  the  dog  raises 
his  head,  opens  his  eyes  with  a  look  of.surpri.se,  and  very  shortly  runs 
about  as  if  nothing  had  happened. 

The  treatment  during  an  epileptic  fit  is  to  generally  carry  the  dog  to 
a  dry  place  where  there  is  some  soft  material  so  that  he  cannot  hurt 
himself  in  his  struggles.  As  soon  after  as  possible  give  him  a  dose  of 
Anti-spasmodic  Drops:  Compound  spirits  of  sulphuric  ether  (known  as 
Hoffman's  anodyne),  and  tincture  of  opium  (laudanum),  equal  parts. 
(Keep  well  corked  and  cool.)  Dose  for  15  to  35  lb.  dog  would  be  a 
teaspoonful  in  two  tablespoonfuls  of  milk.  Larger  dogs  nearly  a  dessert- 
spoonful as  a  dose — and  leave  him  quiet  in  a  warm,  comfortable  kennel. 
Endeavor  to  ascertain  the  cause  of  the  fit.  If  from  over-feeding,  reduce 
the  diet  and  give  gentle  exercise,  and,  if  need  be,  repeated  doses  of  cool- 
ing medicine;  3  gr.  of  bromide  of  potash  for  a  20  lb.  to  40  lb.  clog  twice 
a  clay  in  water  for  a.  week  will  be  beneficial  to  dogs  predisposed  to  epi- 
lepsy. 

Suckling  Fits  are  produced  by  exhaustion  consequent  on  the  bitch 
having  too  many  pups  left  on  her.  She  lies  or  falls  down  breathing  heavily, 
becomes  insensible,  and  is  frequently  much  convulsed.  Remove  all  the 
pups  but  one  or  two,  which  must  meanwhile  be  fed  on  the  bottle,  or  by 
spoon,  condensed  milk — a  little  at  a  time  but  often — and  let  the  mother 
have  a  generous  diet,  and  if  much  reduced  give  Clayton's  or  Dent's  Con- 
dition  Pills  for  a  week   or  so. 

Fits    from    Distemper The    following    is    from    the    American    Field 

and  is  prescribed  for  by  Dent,   their  veterinarian: 

"I  have  an  English  setter  bitch,  twenty  months  old,  which  has  dis- 
temper. I  thought  her  about  over  it,  when  a  few  days  ago  she  had  a  fit  • 
which  lasted  about  3  minutes;  she  got  up  and  seemed  scared,  had  a  wild 
look  in  her  eyes  and  seemed  unable  to  see  well.  She  has  those  fits  now 
once  or  twice  a  day  and  is  very  weak,  but  eats  well,  though  hardly  able  to 
stand  up.  The  fits  she  has.  now  are  of  shorter  duration  but  she  seems 
much  weaker  just  after  one;  she  has  a  fit  soon  after  she  begins  to  eat 
and  is  disturbed  every  morning;  after  she  gets  over  it  she  will  finish  her 
breakfast  of  soup  and  rice  or  milk.  Will  she  necessarily  die  or  is  she 
incurable?  I  have  had  a  good  deal  of  experience  with  distemper  and 
have  lost  eight  four-months-old  puppies  this  Fall,  but  I  have  never  lost 
any  as  old  as  this  one.     Ans—  Give  twenty  grains  of  the  bromide  of  soda 


DISEASES  85 

and   one-thirtieth   of  a   grain   of  arsenic   three   times  a   day;    w«   think  she 
will  recover.-" 

Teething  Fits  often  occur  during  the  cutting  of  the  first  teeth,  but 
more  frequently  when  the  permanent  ones  are  being  irrupted.  Lancing  the 
gums  is  sometimes  resorted  to,  but  as  a  rule  a  little  opening  medicine  is  all 
that  is  needed.  Convulsions  are  frequently  present  in  these  fits,  as  also  in 
those  due  to  worms. 

Fits  Due  to  Worms. — When  these  parasites  are  the  producing  cause, 
that  fact  may  be  ascertained  by  examining  the  fasces  voided  during  or  just 
after  the  fit,  as  some  of  them  will  probably  be  seen.  Or  the  presence  of 
worms  may  be  determined  by  the  symptoms  given  under  that  head,  and 
to   Worms   you   are   referred. 

Feet,  Sore. — Dogs  that  travel  very  much,  sporting  dogs  that  hunt 
over  rough  ground  or  short  stubble,  are  apt  to  get  the  pads  of  the  feet 
contused  and  worn  thin. 

Treatment  depends  on  extent  of  the  injury.  If  feet  are  only  tender 
and  slightly  inflamed,  bathe  with  cold  water,  afterward  applying  freely 
the  following  lotion. 

Tincture    of  arnica     Vs    ounce 

Tincture   of  matico    Vz    ounce 

Tincture    of  opium     1   ounce 

Acetic    acid  %    ounce 

Water   enough   to   till   a   wine   bottle. 

In  severe  cases  apply  a  poultice  of  half  bran  and  half  boiled  turnips. 
If  the  inflammation  is  great,  and  the  feet  become  swollen,  hot  and  pain- 
ful, so  that  the  dog  cannot  stand,  the  general  health  suffers,  as  fever- 
ishness  and  loss  of  appetite  will  reduce  his  strength;  matter  will  form 
in  his  feet  or  perhaps  his  soles  will  slough  off. 

In  such  extreme  cases,  add  linseed  meal  to  the  other  ingredients  and 
pour  a  little  olive  oil  over  its  surface.  The  dog-  should  have  a  mild  aperient 
and  a  dose  of  the  following  fever  mixture: 

Powdered    nitre     1   dram 

Sweet    spirits    of   nitre    ' %    ounce 

Mindererus   spirits    1 V2   ouncs 

Wine   of   antimony    1   dram 

Water     4   ounces 

Dose  for  a  30  lb.  to  50  lb.  dog  would  be  a  tablespoonful  every  four  hours  in 
a  little  gruel. 

Dog  should  be  kept  on  a  light  diet.  Sometimes,  for  more  speedy  relief, 
it  is  well  to  let  the  water  out  with  a  lancet,  and  in  all  respects  these  cases 
should  be  treated  as  ulcers. 


•86  DISEASES 

Goitre,  or  Bronchocelc — This  term  is  applied  to  a  swelling  or  lump 
that  appears  on  the  front  part  of  the  neck,  known  as  the  thyroid  gland. 
It  is  soft  and  elastic  to  the  touch,  and  appears  to  give  no  pain  except  when 
treatment  is  neglected  and  it  increases  to  such  a  size  as  to  interfere  with 
the  breathing.  It  is  especially  a  disease  of  old  dogs,  although  it  often 
occurs  in  ill-fed  and  scrofulous  puppies.  If  will  appear  in  a  night,  and  is 
sometimes  due  to  a  cold  caught,  which  settles  in  the  glands  of  the  throat. 
The  latest,  and'  I  have  found  by  having  to  treat  many  cases,  is  Iodin  Vasigin, 
full  strength,  which  apply  twice  daily,  rubbing  well  in  with  the  hands  as 
you  would  apply  a  liniment.  Another  good  remedy  to  apply  same  as  aboce, 
is,  Iodidode  of  Potassium,  one  dram  to  seven  ounces 'of  lard  (well  mixed). 
Aside  from  external  treatment  give  cod  liver  oil — from  a  teaspoonful  for 
a  20  lb.  dog,  up  to  two  tablespoonfuls  for  a  dog  like  a  pointer  or  St. 
Bernard,  three  times  a  day.  If  abscesses  form  they  must  be  lanced.  Dogs 
suffering  from  Goitre  should  be  extra  well  fed.  Painting  with  tincture  of 
iodine,  one  a  day,  is  as  good  as  'anything  you  can  do. 

Gatherings. — See  Abscesses. 

Gastritis. — Symptoms  very  pronounced  in  the  acute  form,  first  vom- 
iting, pain  and  tenderness.  The  position  of  the  animal  is  often  charac- 
teristic. The  animal  lies  stretched  out  on  his  belly.  There  is  not  the  same 
tendency  to  arched  back  as  in  colic. 

Here  is  another  "old  fashioned"  remedy,  that  I  have  found  most  suc- 
cessful. Get  a  dime's  worth  of  Slippery  Elm  bark,  cut  it  up,  pour  a  quart 
of  water  over  it,  then  set  it  in  another  vessel  of  water,  and  boil  'till  it 
makes  an  emulsion  like  mucilage.  Give  dog  a  tablespoonful,  (small  toys 
half  this),  three  times  a  day  before  feeding.  Feed  light,  soft  foods  for 
a   few  days.     Milk  peptonized   is  very  good. 

If  there  is  constipation,  Enemas  must  be  given. 

"Water  must  be  given  sparingly,  only  a  small  quantity  at  a  time  and 
quite  cold. 

Gleet. — Blaine  gives  this  name  to  a  discharge  from  the  prepuce,  but 
it  appears  to  me  the  name  is  misleading.  For  further  information  see 
Penis,  Discharge  from,  which,  although  not  perhaps  strictly  correct,  is 
adopted  as  being  the  most  generally  useful  and  readily  understood  heading. 
Professor  Law,  however,  enumerates  both  Gleet  and  Gonorrhoea  among 
the  diseases  of  dogs. 

Heart,  Valvular  Disease  of. — A  very  fatal  form  of  heart  disease.  The 
pulse  is  perceptibly  irregular  and  feeble.  A  post-mortem  will  show  the 
valves  thickened,  and  may  present  upon  their  surfaces  granulations  which 
feel  under  the  finger  like  minute  particles  of  sand.  Treatment  is  of  no 
avail;  but  to  prevent  sudden  death  all  undue  excitement  should  be  avoided. 

Harvest  Bugs. — These  come  in  summer  and  are  sometimes,  but  not 
often,  troublesome  to  dogs  as  well  as  man.     They  burrow  in  the  skin,  as 


DISEASES  8? 

does  the  parasite  in  mange.     Eberhart's  Skin  Cure  applied  twice  a  day,  as 
in  mange,  will  soon  destroy  them. 

Haematuria  (Bloody  Urine). — Dogs  have  this  trouble,  being  the  re- 
sult of  calculi  situated  in  the  bladder,  kidney  or  urethra.  Irritation  and 
inflammation  are  caused  by  these  foreign  bodies,  and  also  injure  the  mu- 
cous membrane,  producing  abrasions  and  superficial  bleeding,  the  blood 
being  passed  with  the  urine.  A  blow  across  the  back  may  also  cause  it. 
Upon  pressing  the  dog's  loins  pain  is  evinced,  and  there  is  also  a  certain 
amount  of  irritation  caused  by  passing  the  urine.  Blood  is  sometimes 
mixed  with  the  latter,  or  it  may  be  passed  independently  of  it.  Give'  10 
to  60  drops  of  liquid  extract  of  ergot  every  four  hours,  and  if  the  urinary 
passage  is  the  seat  of  the  injury,  inject  a  weak  solution  of  Condy's  Fluid. 
The  food  should  consist  for  a  time  of  Bovine  or  beef  tea,  with  egg  and 
milk    to    drink.      Under   no    circumstances    administer   a    diuretic. 

Hepatitis    (Inflammation    of   the   Liver). — See    Jaundice. 

Hernia,  Umbilical. — See  Navel  Hernia. 

Hiccough  arises  from  indigestion,  and  often  annoys  house  pets  that 
are  given  improper  food,  such  as  sweets,  etc.  A  wineglassful  of  lime  wa- 
ter in  a  tumbler  of  milk  to  drink,  and  for  a  20  lb.  dog  10  grains  of  bicar- 
bonate of  soda,  and  10  drops  of  sal  volatile  in  a  tablespoonful  of  milk,  will 
usually  prove  effectual.  Another  remedy  I  have  used  is  camplior  water 
(not  spirits).  Give  a  20  to  40  lb.  dog  a  teaspoonful  and  repeat  in  five 
minutes. 

Husk. — Dogs  are  subject  to  a  dry,  husky  cough,  associated  with  de- 
rangement of  the  stomach,  and  worms  are  often  the  originating  cause. 
The  symptoms  are  dry.  hot  nose,  disagreeable  breath,  inflamed  eye,  and 
increased  discharge  from  nose,  with  more  or  less  general  fever;  the  dog 
after  coughing  retches,  bringing  up  portions  of  frothy  mucus.  The  treat- 
ment consists  in  keeping  the  dog  free  from  damp  and  cold,'  feeding  on 
warm,  easily  digested  food,  and  the  administration  of  a  dose  of  salad  oil 
every  third  morning,  and  the  following  two  sets  of  pills,  two  a  day  of  each, 
giving  alternately: 

Pills  for  Husky  Cough. — Powdered  opium,  6  grains;  tartarised  anti- 
mony, 1  grain;  compound  squill  pill,  1  dram;  mix  and  divide  into  twenty- 
four  pills,  and  give  one  to  a  20  lb.  dog  twice  a  day. 

Tonic  Stomachic  Pills. — Pure  Sulphate  of  iron,  12  grains;  dried  bicar- 
bonate of  soda,  24  grains;  extract  of  camomile,  24  grains;  mix  and  divide 
into  twelve  pills.  One  of  these  is  a  dose  for  a  20  lb.  dog.  Not  infrequently 
worms  in  the  stomach  will  cause  husk;  if  so,  a  full  dose  of  ipecacuanha  wine 
to  cause  vomiting  should  be  given. 

As  I  am  writing  I  have  just  had  such  a  case  of  a  dry,  hard  and  in- 
cessant cough  in  an  eight-months-old  bull  terrier  pup,  which  cough  sud- 
denly appeared  without  any  apparent  cause,  the  dog  acting  and  seeming 
well,  only  for  this  dry,  hard  cough.     She  had  been  fully,  as  I  supposed  at 


88  v  DISEASES 

the  time,  treated  for  worms,  and  thought  she  was  rid  of  them,  but  could 
not  account  for  the  cough.  I  was  ou  the  lookout  and  seen  her  have  a 
passage  of  a  bloody  and  mucous  nature.  Toward  night  I  concluded  it 
might  be  worms,  gave  her  a  dose  of  Sergeant's  Sure  Shot  after  she  had 
fasted  from  breakfast  till  supper  time,  and  the  result  was — finding  several 
small  thread  worms  in  her  passage  after  the  vermifuge  had  worked,  and 
here  was  the  cause  of  the  dry,  hard  cough.  I  followed  this  up  the  next 
morning  with  a  second  dose  of  "Sure  Shot,"  got  more  thread  worms,  and 
the  bitch  feeling  much  better,  wanting  to  eat,  and  her  cough  very  much 
better.  She  fully  recovered.  All  this  goes  to  show  that  you  must  get 
rid  of  the  Worms — as  they  are  the  cause  of  more  trouble  to  dogs  than  from 
any  other  cause  or  a  combined  lot  of  causes,  you  may  as  truthfully  say. 

Honie  Sickness. — This  is  often  seen  in  dogs  which,  from  some  causa 
or  other,  have  to  leave  their  home  and  friends,  and  reside  for  a  time  in  a 
hospital.  It  therefore  behooves  every  one  who  has  charge  of  such  dogs  to 
make  them  comfortable,  and  treat  them  as  nearly  as  possible,  consistent 
with  rational  and  medical  treatment,  as  they  would  be  at  home.  It  is 
absolutely  cruel  to  place  a  nervous  and  highly  sensitive  pet  dog  in  a  kennel 
surrounded  by  other  dogs  which  are  continually  barking,  or  to  give  them 
over  entirely  to  an  attendant,  which  is  too  frequently  done  in  hospitals, 
the  owner  of  the  establishment,  or  the  veterinary  surgeon,  only  attending 
at  intervals.  All  pets  should  be  taken  into  the  house,  or  have  a  special 
place  set  apart  for  them,  where  they  can  receive  personal  attention  and  have 
their  small  comforts  attended  to. 

Very  much  the  best  plan  is  to  not  send  your  pet  to  any  veterinary 
hospital,  but  to  keep  it  home  where  it  will  much  better  endure  the  ordeal 
it  may  have  to  go  through,  and  have  the  surgeon  come  there  to  treat  it. 

The  dog  will  be  happier  in  his  own  home  where  it  will  receive,  aside 
from  the  treatment  of  the  doctor,  the  kind  care  and  attention  it  could  not 
get  in   a  strange  place,   among  strangers   and  strange   surroundings. 

Hookworms. — The  process  by  which  the  hookworm  reaches  the  intes- 
tines is  most  interesting.  The  egg,  or  embryo,  is  deposited  in  fecal  matter 
within  the  intestines.  It  hatches,  or  develops,  after  being  exposed  to  air 
and  moisture,  usually  within  twelve  to  twenty-four  hours,  if  the  tempera- 
ture is  above  seventy  or  eighty  degrees  Fahrenheit.  In  about  eight  days, 
under  favorable  conditions,  such  as  being  on  warm,  wet  ground,  it  attains 
full  growth  (microscopically)  and  is  ready  to  infest,  which  it  does  by  boring 
through  the  skin  or  mucous  membrane  of  the  mouth  into  the  blood  canals, 
and  is  carried  along  with  the  blood  currents  to  the  lungs;  then  it  bores 
through  the  walls  of  the  blood  canals  into  the  air  sacs  and  crawls  up 
through  the  windpipe  to  the  throat,  and  then  passes  directly  to  the  in- 
testines, either  by  crawling  or  being  swallowed  with  food  or  water,  attaches 
itself  to  intestinal. membranes  and  begins  a  life  which  lasts  from  six  to 
ten  years,  unless  expelled.  It  subsists  entirely  upon  the  blood  which  it 
sucks.  After  it  is  attached,  it  grows  to  a  length  of  one-third  to  one-half 
inch,  the  female  being  somewhat  larger  than  the  male,  as  shown  in  illus- 
tration.    She  is  very  prolific  and  one  dog  which  is  infested  will  pollute  a 


DISEASES  89 

vast   area    of   ground    by   reason    of   rains    washing    or   spreading    the    feces 
containing  thousands  of  eggs  or  embryos. 

The  presence  of  hookworm  is  hard,  almost  impossible  to  detect  with- 
out the  use  of  a  microscope,  unless  the  investment  is  quite  heavy,  then 
rapid  decline  is  noticed,  such  as  general  weakness  or  paralysis  of  the  legs 
or   hindquarters. 

Symptoms. — Rough  hair;  sometimes  a  cough;  as  a  rule  the  appetite 
continues  fairly  good;  languid;  eyes  become  bloodless  and  listless;  gums 
pale,  generally  a  creamy  white.  Excretion  sometimes  natural,  again  loose, 
again  of  a  dysentery  nature,  frequently  a  little  drop  of  blood  or  two.  This 
may  be  examined  by  the  average  layman  many  times  with  the  naked  eye 
and  from  the  fact  that  he  "doesn't  see  any"  the  conclusion  is  arrived  at 
that  the  dog  is  free  of  hookworm.  Many  times  a  dog  in  apparently  the 
best  of  health  is  infected  with  these  terrible  pests,  his  strong  constitu- 
tion overbalancing  the  damage  that  Mr.  Worm  is  doing.  This  won't  last 
always  and  sooner  or  later  he  will  pay  the  price. 

While  a  microscopical  examination  will  reveal  the  eggs,  it  occasionally 
happens  that  the  worm  itself  is  shown  in  feces  under  certain  conditions. 
Of  course,  a  microscopic  examination  of  the  feces  for  the  ova  is  the  one, 
absolute,   certain   way   of   determining   a   dog   having   them. 

This  worm  has  been  discovered  in  dogs,  cats,  foxes,  badgers  and 
human  beings,  adults  as  well  as  children.  This  is  mentioned  with  the 
view  to  impress  upon  all  interested  the  necessity  of  being  alive  to  the 
true  situation,  in  order  to  prevent  the  scattering  of  the  disease  and  to 
show  the  chances  of  it  being  scattered. 

The  worm  attaches  itself  to  the  walls  of  the  intestine  and  lives  about 
seven  years.  Remember,  kennel  owners,  the  worm  does  not  incubate  in 
the  intestine,  but  simply  deposits  its  thousands  of  eggs  there,  which  are 
passed  out  on  the  ground  in  the  excrement.  I  have  dissected  six-week- 
old  puppies  and  found  many  hookworms.  This  was,  no  doubt,  brought 
about  by  the  dam  lying  out  on  the  ground,  her  teats  being  attacked  by 
the  freshly  hatched  worm,  and  brought  to  the  suckling  puppies.  They  were 
treated  in  the  ordinary  way  for  worms,  but  this  will  not  kill  hookworms. 

If  hookworm  is  found  in  one  dog  in  the  kennel,  it  is  safe  to  assume 
every  dog  in  the  kennel  is  infected,  and  should  be  treated. 

The  following  most  valuable  article  is  from  The  American  Field,   writ- 
ten by  Edward  Martin,  M.  R.  C.  V.  S.: 

"Until  quite  recently  hookworm  disease  in  the  dog,  also  known  as 
pernicious  anemia,  uncinariasis,  etc.,  has  been  but  slightly  recognized.  This 
is  probably  owing  to  neglect  on  the  part  of  owners  of  dogs  and  veterin- 
arians to  make  careful  post-mortem  examinations,  and  again,  to  the  fact 
that  young  dogs  infected  with  hookworm  generally  carry  round  worms  and 
tapeworms,*  and  it  is  to  the  effects  of  these  that  death,  when  it  occurs,  is 
attributed. 

The  hookworm  parasite,  technically  known  as  Uncinaria,  inhabits^the 
small  intestines  of  dogs  and  foxes.  When  mature  they  attach  themselves 
to  the  mucous  membrane  and  live  entirely  on  the  blood  they  extract.  For 
the  purposes  of  this  article  they  may  be  described  as  an  extremely  fine 
round  worm,  white  or  grayish  in  color,  from  one-third  to  seven-eighths  of 
an  inch  in  length,  and  about  as  thick  as  a  fine  sewing  needle.    As  they  can 


90  DISEASES 

seldom  be  seen  in  the  stools  it  may  be  advisable  to  describe  their  appear- 
ance on  post-mortem  examination  of  their  host. 

Dogs  dying  from  this  disease  are  generally  emaciated,  and  when  the 
patient  has  lingered  long  covered  with  bedsores.  The  gums  are  pale,  often 
spongy  and  ulcerated,  the  teeth  covered  with  a  dark  green  deposit,  with  a 
pronounced  odor.  On  opening  the  abdomen  the  mesenteric  glands  are 
generally  found  to  be  enlarged  and  dark  in  color,  due  <to  irritation  set  up 
by  the  poisonous  products  of  the  parasites.  The  outer  surface  of  the  stom- 
ach and  bowels,  as  a  rule,  show  little  or  no  changes;  in  aggravated  cases 
there  may  be  a  few  dark  red  or  purple  spots. 

To  find  the  parasites  the  stomach  and  bowels  should  be  taken  out  and 
slit  up.  The  parasite  does  not  often  occur  in  the  stomach,  but  may  be 
found  firmly  attached  to  the  wall  in  any  part  of  the  small  intestines.  The 
mucous  membrane  of  the  intestines  should  be  examined  in  a  good  light, 
inch  by  inch,  with  a  magnifying  glass,  and  if  necessary  washed  with  run- 
ning water   to   clear   away   mucus,   partly   digested   food,   etc. 

The  parasite  can  be  recognized  curled  up  in  a  spiral  or  lying  straight  in 
groups  of  four  or  five  to  a  dozen.  They  may  be  evenly  distributed  through- 
out the  small  intestine.  If  the  examination  be  made  shortly  after  death, 
each  parasite  is  found  firmly  attached  in  the  center  of  a  red,  inflamed  spot; 
wherever  the  contents  of  the  bowels  are  cherry  colored  from  blood  staining 
the  parasites  can  be  found  most  numerously.  The  whole  of  the  small 
intestine  is,  as  a  rule,  inflamed  and  thickened.  In  many  cases  round  worms 
and  tapeworms  are  also  present,  especially  in  young  dogs. 

Symptoms  and  Diagnosis  of  the  Disease. 

Hookworm  disease  has  been  looked  on  as  essentially  a  disease  of  sport- 
ing dogs,  especially  hounds.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  all  breeds  are  equally  sus- 
ceptible, and  it  is  simply  due  to  the  fact  that  sporting  dogs  are  generally 
raised  and  kept  where  the  conditions  favor  the  parasites,  that  it  has  been 
so  considered.  Dogs  at  all  ages  are  liable  to  become  infected,  but  grow- 
ing puppies  from  a  few  weeks  to  a  year  old  are  more  susceptible  to  the 
effects  of  the  worms. 

Symptoms  are  unfortunately  indefinite  in  the  majority  of  cases.  The 
dog  may  show  signs  of  worms  and  with  treatment  pass  round  worms  and 
tapeworms,  but  fails  to  pick  up  and  develop  as  expected.  Young  puppies 
become  anemic,  with  pallid  gums,  distended  abdomen,  injected  eyes  and 
a  hot,  dry  nose.  The  usual  treatment  with  vermifuges  and  purgatives 
produces  a  persistent  diarrhea,  the  worm  toxins  produce  convulsions,  coma 
and  death  in  a  very  few  days.  Older  dogs,  from  six  to  twelve  months  old, 
pass  through   these  stages  more  slowly. 

The  appetite  is  capricious  or  voracious,  the  gums  become  spongy  and 
bleed  easily  to  the  touch,  development  of  teeth  is  arrested — in  several 
cases  I  have  observed  crumbling  of  the  enamel  due  to  faulty  assimilation 
of  the  necessary  constituents  and  to  the  presence  of  a  foul-smelling  green 
deposit.  Chorea  may  develop  suddenly  and  progresses  in  violence  until 
death  occurs.  In  the  course  of  time  diarrhea  sets  in,  which  increases  in 
severity  until  blood-stained  or  tarry-looking  movements  occur  several  times 


DISEASES  91 

in  the  hour.  Rapid  emaciation,  exhaustion  and  death  follow  in  a  few  days, 
once  dysentery  is  established. 

Absolute  diagnosis  can  only  be  made  by  microscopical  examinations 
of  the  stools.  This,  however,  involves  considerable  technical  difficulties, 
and  for  practical  purposes  may  be  counted  out. 

Treatment. 

In  nursing  and  newly  weaned  puppies  is  almost  out  of  the  question,  as 
drastic  remedies  cannot  be  used  safely.  The  remedies  recommended  by 
government  experts  for  uncinariasis  in  man  are  thymol,  male  fern,  oil  of 
turpentine  and  chloroform,  singly  or  in  combination,  followed  by  active 
purgatives.  In  the  dog  it  is  advisable  to  give  all  vermifuge  medicines  in 
capsules  or  coated  pills,  to  prevent  nausea  and  vomiting,  which  occurs  when 
medicines  are  given  in  fluid  form.  In  the  dog  better  results  are  produced 
by  giving  daily  doses  before  feeding  each  morning.  In  this  way  dysentery 
is  not  so  liable  to  be  set  up  as  where  full  treatments  are  given. 

Thymol  is  looked  on  as  a  specific  in  the  human  being,  but  is  a  most 
unreliable  drug  for  the  dog.  In  a  number  of  puppies  of  the  same  age,  weight 
,  and  condition  I  have  found  some  who  would  tolerate  large  doses,  while  in 
others  extremely  small  doses  would  produce  persistent  vomiting,  convul- 
sions and  death.  Extract  of  male  fern  in  combination  with  turpentine, 
chloroform  and  castor  oil  or  glycerine  is  much  safer  given  in  small  daily 
doses. 

During  treatment  tonics,  such  as  iron,  arsenic  and  strychnine,  arsenite 
of  copper,  etc.,  should  be  given,  and  to  sustain  strength  cod  liver  oil,  raw 
meat  and  milk  and  eggs  should  be  fed  generously.  To  control  diarrhea 
bismuth  subgallate  may  be  given  in  large  doses;  it  acts  as  an  intestinal 
antiseptic,  as  well  as  being  an  astringent. 

As  a  tonic,  instead  of  drugs  given  in  this  article,  the  writer  of  this 
book  would  use  Sergeant's  Condition  Pills,  in  all  cases. 

As  to  Prevention. 

Commencing  with  the  egg,  it  has  been  found  that  they  are  formed  and 
undergo  changes  while  in  the  oviduct  of  the  female.  After  being  passed 
out  of  the  dog's  bowels  with  the  stools  they  undergo  further  changes  in 
surface  soil,  the  time  occupied  depending  on  the  suitability  of  the  surround- 
ings, the  essential  features  being  moisture  and  favorable  temperatures. 
Where  conditions  are  favorable  the  eggs  are  hatched  out  in  a  few  days,  and 
after  the  embryos  have  undergone  several  moultings  they  are  ready  to 
infect  dogs  by  means  of  drinking  water  or  contaminated  food. 

The  important  features  to  remember  are:  (1)  That  the  eggs  are  hatch- 
ed out,  not  while  in  the  intestine  of  the  dog,  but  after  being  passed  out  with 
the  stools.  From  this  it  follows,  then,  that  every  individual  hookworm 
present  in  the  intestines  of  the  dog'represents  infection  by  a  single  embryo. 
In  other  words,  the  parasites  do  not  actually  increase  in  number  while 
in  the  dog's  intestines.  (2)  Moisture  is  absolutely  essential  to  the  hatch- 
ing out  of  the  eggs.  Drinking  troughs  and  contaminated  water  supply  are, 
therefore,  rightly  considered  as  the  chief  sources  of  infection. 


92  DISEASES 

From  these  facts  it  can  be  seen  that  the  essentials  of  prevention  of 
hookworm  disease  are  absolute  cleanliness  in  every  particular,  especially  as 
regards  feeding  pans  and  water  vessels,  and  disinfection  of  all  excretions 
and  soiled  bedding.  When  an  animal  dies  the  body  should  be  buried  in 
quicklime,  or,  better  still,  cremated.  Above  all,  dampness  must  be  avoided 
in  every  possible  way. 

For  disinfecting  sleeping  quarters  dry  sawdust  impregnated  with  a 
reliable  disinfectant  is  of  great  value,  as  it  absorbs  moisure  and  when 
brushed  out  carries  away  and  destroys  the  eggs  of  the  parasite.  Woodwork 
may  be  whitewashed  or  painted  and  all  floors  should  be  cleaned  out  at 
least  once  daily.  Earth  floors  should  be  covered  with  boards  or  concrete. 
As  damp  soil  is  the  medium  in  which  the  embryos  develop,  outdoor  runs 
should  be  dressed  with  quicklime,  well  drained  and  covered  with  several 
inches  of  furnace  ashes  or  crushed  coke.  This  when  alternately  rolled  and 
sprinkled-  with  crude  petroleum  will  in  time  form  a  waterproof  asphalt- 
like surface  which  will  carry  off  water  according  to  the  direction  in  which 
it  is  sloped.  All  food  and  drinking  water  should  be  given  in  clean  pans, 
and  under  no  consideration  should  dogs  be  allowed  to  eat  from  the  floor 
of  sleeping  quarters  or  from  the  ground  in  the  runs.  To  prevent  mud  from 
being  carried  into  the  kennels  on  the  feet  of  kennel  men  or  visitors  where 
the  surrounding  grounds  are  liable  to  be  muddy,  board  walks  and  a  door 
mat  and  scraper  at  the  kennel  entrance  should  be  laid  down. 

Confinement  to  kennel  quarters  in  some  districts  seems  to  be  the  only 
safe  plan  to  avoid  the  disease,  as,  when  allowed  to  roam  at  liberty,  dogs 
will  drink  from  stagnant  of  surface  water  and  thus  become  infected. 
Suspected  cases  should  be  isolated  whenever  possible. 

Hookworm  disease  is  not  necessarily  nor  commonly  fatal  to  adult 
dogs;  in  fact,  in  Western  Pennsylvania  it  is  the  rule  rather  than  the  ex- 
ception to  find  a  few  hookworms  in  dogs  dead  from  other  causes.  It  is 
such  cases  that  constitute  a  danger  to  young  and  susceptible  dogs.  When 
the  method  of  reproduction  of  the  hookworm  is  taken  into  consideration, 
it  can  be  understood  that  when  reinfection  is  prevented  by  following  the 
precautions  suggested,  it  is  quite  possible  for  a  dog  to  be  entirely  freed 
from  hookworms,  provided  his  vitality  be  kept  up  to  the  highest  standard 
during  the  period  necessary  to  get  rid  of  the  worms  by  cautious  and  per- 
sistent treatment." 

Indigestion  (Dyspepsia) — This  means  that  food  taken  into  the  stom- 
ach is  not  digested  or  made  fit  for  the  nourishment  of  the  body,  and  that 
the  stomach  has  altogether  or  partially  lost  its  power  of  performing  its 
most  important  office.  This  is  caused  in  various  ways;  want  of  exercise, 
improper  food,  or  having' been  fed  irregularly.  Having  been  overfed  or 
having  fasted  too  long  will  produce  indigestion,  but  to  cause  a  serious 
attack,  the  causes  must  have  been  of  some  standing. 

Symptoms. — A  vitiated  appetite,  wholesome  food  he  will  turn  his  nose 
up  at,  or  eat  it  mincingly,  with  a  preference  for  filth  and  garbage.  Con- 
siderable thirst  it  present,  and  often  vomiting.  Flatulence  is  also  an  ac- 
companiment and  the  gums  become  inflamed,  and  breath  is  foul  and  offensive 
when  of  long  standing.     Indigestion  causes  many  other  forms  of  disease, 


DISEASES  93 

following  neglected  cases — attacks  of  diarrhea,  sometimes  alternating  with 
fits  of  constipation,  as  derangement  of  the  bowels  are  almost  inseparate 
from  it.  Confirmed  constipation  sometimes  exists.  The  dog  may  become 
excessively  fat  and  suffer  from  asthma  accompanied  by  a  cough.  The 
dog's  temper  is  often  snappish   during  the  attack. 

Indigestion  is  the  cause  of  many  other  forms  of  disease,  which  are 
sure  to  follow  neglected  cases — derangement  of  the  bowels  being  almost 
inseparable  from  it.  Diarrhea  attacks  occur,  often  alternating  with  fits 
of  constipation;  or  confirmed  constipation  may  exist.  A  dog  will  often 
become  excessively  fat  and  suffer  from  asthma  and  asthmatic  cough. 

A  secondary  symptom  is  skin  disease  in  one  form  or  another.  In  treat- 
ing for  indigestion  tho  most  important  thing  to  do  is  to  remove  the  cause 
or  causes.  Give  a  sufficiency  only,  of  plain,  wholesome  food,  and  keep 
within  the  dog's  reach  a  supply  of  clean,  fresh  water.  Remedies  must  be 
given  according  to  existing  circumstances — diarrhea  for  instance,  treated 
as  recommended  under  that  head.  The  main  object  is,  however,  to  tone  up 
the  stomach  and  get  this  organ  again  into  good  working  shape.  Use  the 
following  aperient  bolus: 

Barbadoes    aloes    15   grains 

Jalap 1   dram 

Towdered  ginger 1    dram 

Castile    soap    2   drams 

Make  up  info  a  mass  and  divide  into  l-r>  grain  balls.  Dose,  one,  two 
or  three  balls,  according  to  size  of  dog. 

When  bowels  have  freely  acted  then  give  the  following,  twice  daily, 
until  health  has  returned: 

Towdered  rhubarb    1   scruple 

Powdered   ginger    1   scruple 

Extract  of  gentian    4   scruples 

Divide  into  twenty-four  pills  and  give  one  to  four  pills  twice  daily. 
If  much  flatulence,  put  a  little  bicarbonate  of  soda  on  back  of 
tongue  and  let  dog  have  water. 

With  careful  diet  and  exercise,  these  means  will  be  found  successful. 
Add  a  little  lime  water  to  the  milk  that  is  given  to  drink.  By  treating 
the  patient  thus  and  paying  strict  attention  to  his  dietary  and  exercise, 
the  disease  will  soon  yield. 

I  have  used  with  good  results  in  lieu  of  the  above  pill,  Clayton's  Di- 
gestive Pills  and  believe  to  be  very  good. 

The  following  article  I  found  somewhere,  and  as  it  is  worth  repro- 
ducing here  entire,  I  give  it  space  in  this  book: 

"As  in  man,  and  many  animals,  indigestion  in  the  dog  may  be  acute, 
chronic  and  passive.  In  acute  indigestion  the  attack  is  sudden  and  painful, 
and  is  the  result  of  an  overloaded  stomach.  The  disorder  is  called  chronic 
when  the  dog  suffers  for  a  continued  time  and  his  stomach  and  intestines 


94  DISEASES 

are  in  a  weakened  condition.  It  is  active  when  the  attack  is  brought  on 
by  some  extrinsic  cause,  passive  when  it  is  the  result  of  some  other  disease, 
or  is  due  to  an  intrinsic  cause. 

"The  breeds  of  dogs  most  likely  to  be  affected  by  indigestion  are 
the  pug,  the  Japanese  spaniel,  the  black  and  tan,  the  greyhound,  the 
Yorkshire  terrier,  the  French  poodle  and  the  fox  terrier. 

"Pugs  are  probably  the  greatest  sufferers.  As  a  rule,  they  are  en- 
couraged in  laziness,  while  sweetmeats  are  fed  to  them  indiscriminately, 
so  that  it  is  not  surprising  they  should  become  fat  and  dyspeptic. 

"The  foods  which  are  richest  in  fats  and  those  which  are  prone  to 
fermentation  are  the  most  indigestible,  but  it  is  not  so  much  the  nature  of 
the  food  as  it  is  the  quantity  consumed  at  one  time  which  injures  an 
animal's  stomach.  Small  dogs  are  more  voracious  in  their  feeding  than 
large  dogs.  Some  dogs  never  or  seldom  get  a  bone  to  gnaw.  The  dog  is  a 
carnivorous  animal,  and  in  a  state  of  nature  he  lives  only  on  the  flesh  of 
other  animals.  As  he  swallows  his  food  with  but  little  mastication,  Nature 
has  provided  him  with  a  desire  to  gnaw  the  bones  into  small  pieces.  "When 
these  small  pieces  are  taken  into  the  stomach  they  bruise  and  lacerate  the 
food  until  it  is  made  thoroughly  digestible.  It  is  believed  that  70  per 
cent  of  the  cases  of  indigestion  in  dogs  are  due  to  their  being  deprived 
of  bones  to  gnaw.  Domestication  has  to  a  great  extent  modified  the  habits 
of  the  dog.  Some  pets  are  pampered  and  spoiled  to  the  degree  that  they 
will  eat  only  certain  foods,  which  must  be  fed  to  them  with  a  fork  or  from 
some  particular  dish.  Such  peculiarities  are  predisposing  causes  to  indi- 
gestion. 

"A  symptom  of  acute  indigestion  is  vomiting  after  feeding.  Later 
this  is  followed  by  general  dullness;  the  dog  isolates  himself  from  his 
friends,  his  eyes  .roll  with  an  expression  of  fear.  The  muzzle  may  be  dry. 
Rumbling  sounds  in  the  bowel  sare  heard,  accompanied  by  distension  of 
the  abdomen,  which  is  filled  with  gas.  If  the  animal  is  forced  to  move, 
he  shows  great  uneasiness  and  is  stiff  in  his  posterior  limbs,  his  back 
arched  to  relieve  the  tension  of  the  abdominal  muscles.  If  the  abdomen  is 
manipulated  he  evinces  acute  pain.  The  bowels  are  constipated..  These 
symptoms  may  continue  for  an  hour  or  more,  and  the  attack  may  pass  off 
as  suddenly  as  it  began,  or  it  may  last  for  some  length  of  time,  during 
which  the  dog  suffers  the  greatest  pain.  Then  the  pain  ceases,  his  eyes 
brighten,  he  becomes  cheerful,  and  off  he  goes  for  a  run,  apparently  per- 
fectly well. 

"The  symptoms  of  chronic  indigestion  are  the  same  as  those  of  the 
acute  attack,  only  they  are  less  intense  and  they  continue  for  days  at  a 
time.  The  dog  often  grows  irritable  to  a  state  of  fenzy,  and  will  run  about 
snapping  and  biting,  exposing  himself  to  be  shot  for  mad  by  some  over- 
zealous  policeman. 

"As  regards  treatment,  it  is  more  important  to  regulate  the  diet 
than  to  give  medicines.  Feed  the  sufferer  once  or  twice  a  day,  not  oftener, 
and  feed  him  sparingly.  Give  him  five  (5)  grains  of  saccharated  pepsin 
before  meals,  and  five  (5)  grains  each  of  subnitrate  of  bismuth  and  bi- 
carbonate of  soda  after  meals.  For  small  dogs,  such  as  terriers,  black 
and  tans,  Japanese  spaniels,  etc.,  the  dose  should   he  reduced  one-half," 


DISEASES  95 

Inversion  of  the  Vagina — See  Uterus,  Inversion  of. 

Influenza. — This  is  an  epidemic  resembling  common  cold,  but  more 
severe  in  its  effects,  and  contagious.  The  causes  are  supposed  to  be  atmos- 
pheric cold,  and  damp  weather  in  spring  and  autumn,  which  are  the  usual 
seasons  of  its  appearance.  Influenza  is  not  to  be  dreaded  if  taken  in  hand 
at  once,  but  if  once  the  system  becomes  run  down  or  the  various  symptoms 
which  denote  the  disease  take  good  hold,  there  is  serious  trouble  ahead,  and 
leads  to  complications  which  deplete  the  kennel.  Even  if  a  cure  is  affected 
the  convalesence  is  long  and  subject  to  a  relapse  from  the  most  trivial  cause. 
In  the  first  stage  the  symptoms  are  dullness  of  the  animal,  loss  of  appetite, 
rigors  or  shivering  fits,  nose  hot,  then  cold,  increased  thirst.  Second  stage: 
A  discharge  from  nose  and  eyes,  which  at  first  is  mucoid  and  watery,  but 
it  soon  becomes  of  a  mattery  description;  the  breathing  becomes  acceler- 
ated and  the  conjunctival  membrane  red  (this  is  the  lining  membrane  of 
the  eyelid).  The  symptoms  in  these  first  stages  are  very  like  the  earlier 
symptoms  of  distemper,  and  most  people  seeing  one  of  these  cases  for  the 
first  time,  and  in  a  young  dog,  would  say  it  had  the  latter-named  disease. 
The  discharge  is  not,  however,  of  the  purulent  offensive  character 
that  denotes  distemper  and  the  disease  is  as  liable  to  attack  old  dogs  as 
young  ones.  In  some  cases  the  eyes  are  seriously  affected,  the  cornea  be- 
comes of  a  bluish  shade,  the  sight  is  affected,  and  in  some  cases  ulcers 
form.  In  the  latter  case  use  Eberhart's  Eye  Lotion  No.  2,  two  or  three 
times  daily. 

Distemper  is  gradual  in  its  development,  but  in  influenza  the  dif- 
ferent stages  develop  with  great  rapidity,  the  disease  running  in  some 
cases  on  to  complications  in  twenty-four  hours.  If  the  complaint  is  not 
checked  in  its  earlier  stages  one  or  both  of  the  after-mentioned  compli- 
cations may  set  in.  These  complications  are  affections  of  the  lungs,  and 
those  of  a  rheumatismal  character.  When  the  chest  complication  is  setting 
in,  the  breathing  becomes  more  accelerated  and  painful,  the  fever  increases, 
in  fact  the  symptoms  are  those  of  ordinary  chest  complaints;  and  these 
may  be  bronchitis,  congestion  and  inflammation  of  the  lungs  or  pleurisy. 
As  it  requires  the  skilled  practitioner  to  differentiate  one  class  of  chest 
disease  from  another,  it  would  be  useless  to  attempt  to  explain  to  the 
amateur  how  to  diagnose  this  for  himself. 

The  dog  should  be  kept  in  dry  quarters  and  away  from  draughts. 
The  treatment  should  be  similar  to  that  recommended  under  Cold.  The 
dog  will,  however,  require  still  greater  care  exercised  in  keeping  him 
warm  and  in  a  well-ventilated  place,  as  well  as  in  being  supported  with 
easily-digested  food,  such  as  strong  broth,  beef  tea,  boiled  milk,  bread,  etc. 
In  the  early  stages,  Hoffman's  anodyne  or  compound  spirit  of  sulphuric 
ether,  given  in  milk  three  times  a  day,  is  generally  beneficial.  Dose  for 
a  20  lb.  dog,  15  drops;  smaller  toy  dogs.  10  drops;  larger  dogs,  20  drops. 
Any  discharge  from  the  nose  should  be  encouraged  by  warm  fomentations 
and  making  the  dog  inhale  the  vapor  from  vinegar  of  squills  sprinkled  on  a 
hot  wet  sponge  or  cloth.  If  the  throat  is  swollen  and  sore,  slightly  blister 
with  vinegar  and  mustard,  but  do  not  apply  too  long. 

Feed  on  nourishing  foods,   strong  broth,   boiled  milk  and  bovine.     A 


96  DISEASES 

few  drops  of  the  latter,  administered  frequently  in   milk,  is  very  strength- 
ening. 

In  convalescence  a  treatment  for  a  few  works  of  Eberhart's  Tonic 
Pill,  (which  contain  no  arsenic  or  "dope")  will  be  of  great  benefit  in 
building  the  dog  up. 

Another   authority  advises   as    follows: 

"The  dog  will,  however,  require  great  care  exercised  in  keeping  him 
warm  and  in  a  well-ventilated  place,  as  well  as  in  being,  supported  with 
easily-digested  food,  such  as  strong  broth,  beef  tea,,  boiled  milk,  bread, 
etc.  In  the  early  stages  compound  spirit  of  sulphuric  ether,  given  in  milk 
+  hree  times  a  day,  is  generally  beneficial.  Dose  for  a  twenty  pound  dog,  15 
drops;  Any  discharge  from  the  nose  should  be  encouraged  by  warm  fomen- 
tations and  making  the  dog  inhale  the  vapor  from  vinegar  or  squills  sprink- 
led on  a  hot,  wet  sponge  or  cloth.  If  the  throat  is  swollen  and  sore,  slightly 
blister  with  vinegar  and  mustard.  In  convalescence  give  cod  liver  oil  and 
syrup  of  iodide  of  iron,"  or  Eberhart's  Tonic  Pills  instead  of  the  cod  liver 
oil  and  iron,  are  just  the  thing  to  use  here. 

The  following  is  also  good  advice  on  Influenza: 

Symptoms:  The  disease  is  commonly  located  in  the  mucous  mem- 
brane of  the  nose,  the  lungs  and  air  passages.  The  first  symptoms  are 
those  of  a  common  cold  chill,  lassitude,  shivering,  sneezing  and  loss  of 
appetite.  The  small  veins  of  the  eye  and  membranes  are  injected  and 
there  is  a  profuse  discharge  "of  tears,  as  well  as  a  swelling  of  the  nasal 
membranes.  The  throat  becomes  sore  and  there  is  a  dry,  hoarse  cough 
that  is  sometimes  so  severe  as  to  terminate  in  attempts  to  vomit.  Breath- 
ing is  hurried  and  painful  and  prostration  is  well  marked.  The  patient  is 
dull  and  sleepy,  and,  when  forced  to  move  acts  stiff,  sore  and  lame.  There 
is  more  or  less  fever  of  an  intermittent  type  and  the  animal  suffers  from 
excessive  thirst.  The  pulse  is  irregular  and  usually  is  full  and  soft.  Diges- 
tion is  disturbed  and  the  bowels  are  generally  too  loose,  although  in  some 
cases  constipated.      Expectoration   is  scanty,   but   frequently  attempted. 

Treatment:  Keep  the  patient  warm  and  in  a  room  that  is  well  venti- 
lated and  free  from  draughts.  Allow  plenty  of  cold  water  to  drink  and  feed 
anything  the  patient  will  eat.  Broths  of  mutton,  beef  or  milk  are  good, 
as  well  as  raw,  loan  beef,  chopped  fine;  egg  noggs.  raw  eggs,  gelatine,  etc, 
If  the  temperature  is  high  and  continues  so.  give  quinine  in  two-grain 
doses  every  four  hours  until  it  is  reduced.  If  the  bowels  are  constipated, 
loosen  them  by  doses  of  olive  oil,  a  tablespoonful  to  a  dose.  If  the  throat 
is  badly  congested  and  breathing  is  difficult,  it  should  be  rubbed  with 
some  camphorated  oil,  or  hot  applications  applied,  and  then  bandaged  with 
soft  flannel. 

The  following  prescription  is  highly  recommended:  Ammonia  mur. 
and  ext.  of  glycyrrhizae  pulv.,  of  each  two  drams;   aquae,  three  ounces. 

Give  one  teaspoonful  in  water,  every  three  hours. 

It  is  important  that  the  animal's  strength  be  kept  up  and  cod  liver 
oil  should  be  given  in  tablespoonful  doses  four  times  a  day,  as  well  as  the 
syrup  of  iodide  of  iron. 

The  doses  given  are  for  medium  sized  dogs,  use  judgment  if  for 
small  dogs. 


r-~ —  diseases  ;      ;  97 

IrLs,   Inflammation  or. — See  Iritis. 

Injury  to  the  Brain — The  bony  covering  of  the  brain  is  very  strong  in 
the  dog.  They  are  liable  to  accidents  from  falls  on  the  head,  running  full 
force  against  some  obstacle,  or  from  a  blow,  which  may  cause  concussion 
of  the  brain.  The  dog  will  lie  stunned  or  insensible,  breathing  feebly,  and 
pulse  small  and  quick.  In  treating,  examine  the  head  for  fracture  of  the 
skull,  and,  if  bleeding,  stop  it  by  cold  applications.  In  cases  of  this  kind 
consult  a  good  veterinary  surgeon.  Until  he  comes  rub  brandy  or  whisky 
on  the  gums  and  keep  the  body  warm.  If  you  have  on  hand  ammonia  hold 
it  to  the  nostrils. 

Intussusception. — See  Bowels,  Obstruction  of. — This  is  a  slipping  of 
one  portion  of  the  intestines  that  has  been  contracted  by  spasm,  within 
another  part  retaining  its  natural  diameter,  and  is  another  and  not  uncom- 
mon cause  of  obstruction,  and  apt  to  occur  during  spasmodic  colic.  It  is 
fatal,  and  can  not  be  determined  by  symptoms,  a  postmortem  only  showing 
the  trouble.  No  dog  should  be  allowed  to  be  costive  over  two  days,  and 
not  so  long,  is  much  safer,  without  having  been  helped  by  proper  remedies 
prescribed  elsewhere.  It  is  always  safe,  however,  and  advisable  to  give  in 
such  cases  a  full  dose  of  castor  oil,  olive  oil  or  a  mixture  of  both.  Worms 
can  cause  obstruction  in  the  intestines,  especially  in  puppies,  round  worms 
getting  coiled  up  into  balls,  which  sets  up  local  irritation,  interfering  with 
the  natural   action   of  the  bowels. 

Jaundice,  or  the  "Yellows,"  and  Inflammation  of  (he  Liver  (Hepatitis). 
— These  should  be  treated  as  distinct  diseases,  but  to  the  ordinary  dog 
owner  the  division  would  be  of  little  use.  the  causes  and  general  treatment 
being  alike.  There  are  two  forms  of  inflammation  of  the  liver — the  acute 
and  chronic,  the  former  the  rarer,  which  appears  more  suddenly;  the  latter 
comes  as  a  sequel  of  the  acute.  The  causes  of  this  disease,  in  most  cases, 
are  traceable  to  improper  and  over-feeding,  combined  with  lack  of  exercise, 
which  accounts  for  the  great  number  of  such  cases  occurring  in  house  and 
pet  dogs.  In  hunting  dogs  it  can  be  brought  on  by  continued  exposure  to 
wet,  or  their  going  into  water  in  cold  weather,  sleeping  in  damp  places, 
of  over-exertion. 

One  very  common  cause  is  the  repeated  resort  to  powerful  emetics, 
which  so  many  use  as  if  they  possessed  a  charm  over  dog  diseases. 

Symptoms. — Dog  is  dull,  restless  in  his  sleep,  has  excessive  thirst,  very 
poor  appetite,  becomes  thin,  and  the  portions  of  his  skin  not  covered  by 
hair  you  will  readily  notice  to  be  of  a  yellowish  color  or  tinge.  This  will 
be  seen  on  the  gums,  lips,  and  under  the  legs.  The  discharge  is  fetid,  and 
urine,  passed  in  small  quantities,  is  yellow.  There  is  also  fever,  with  fits 
of  heat  and  shivering.  Vomiting  sometimes  occurs;  the  matter  ejected 
is  slimy  and  of  a  yellowish  color;  the  bowels  are  generally  constipated, 
and  the  excrement  of  a  pale  clay  color.  In  chronic  cases  the  belly  is  often 
enlarged  and  flatulence  often  exists.  In  severe  cases  the  dog  will  los« 
flesh  rapidly,  and  soon  become  a  mere  skeleton.  The  liver,  in  a  healthy 
state,  secretes  a  yellow  fluid  called  the  gall,  which  is  collected  in  the  gall 


98  msEAsss       --*  ■*  i   -    -   ;    j         | 

bladder,  intended  to  mix  with  the  chyle,  completing  digestion.  When  ob- 
struction of  the  gall  bladder  takes  place  the  gall  is  diverted  from  its 
natural  purpose,  is  reabsorbed  by  the  blood  vessels,  enters  the  general 
system,  giving  a  bright  saffron  color  to  the  eyes,  lips,  inside  of  the  ears, 
arms  and  thighs,  sometimes  to  the  whole  skin,  and  from  this  it  is  often 
called  the  "Yellows." 

Jaundice  is  of  frequent  occurrence,  often  exists  as  a  sequel  to  distem- 
per, and  when  this  is  the  case  is  most  difficult  to  manage  on  account  of 
the  already  reduced  strength  of  the  patient.  Treatment  must  to  some 
extent  be  governed  by  circumstances  of  each  case. 

The  invariable  yellow  color  of  the  parts  mentioned  as  a  symptom  in 
this  disease  is  one  which  the  least  careful  observer  cannot  fail  to  notice; 
but  before  this  occurs  there  are  other  symptoms  which  should  not  be 
overlooked.  In  the  earlier  stages  the  dog's  appetite  fails;  he  suffers  con- 
siderable thirst  which  increases  as  the  disease  progreses;  there  is  fever, 
with  alternate  fits  of  heat  and  shivering;  vomiting  may  occur,  and  the 
matter  ejected  is  generally  slimy  and  of  a  yellowish  color;  the  urine  is 
passed  in  small  quantities,  and  is  a  deep  yellow  color;  the  bowels  are 
generally  constipated,  and  the  excrement  is  of  a  pale  clay  color.  In  chronic 
cases  the  belly  is  enlarged,  and  flatulence  often  exists;  while  on  the  right 
side  a  swelling  may  be  felt.  In  severe  cases  the  dog  rapidly  loss  flesh 
and  soon  becomes  a  mere  skeleton;  the  coat  is  rough  and  staring,  and 
often  somes  off  in  patches.  All  writers  I  have  consulted  on  the  subject 
recommend  mercury  in  the  treatment  of  jaundice,  so  I  here  give  par- 
ticulars of  its  dose,  and  the  mode  of  administering  it,  for  the  benefit  of 
my  readers,  although  I  do  not  myself  use  it. 

Mercurial  Treatment  of  Jaundice. — Calomel  2  grains  to  4  grains,  with 
1  grain  of  opium  every  six  hours,  as  per  size  of  dog,  is  not  uncommon  pre- 
scription. Or  another  treatment  is:  Blue  pill  3  grains,  opium  1  grain, 
to  be  given  every  five  or  six  hours.  If  diarrhea  be  produced  by  this  treat- 
ment, the  quantity  of  opium  must  be  increased,  and  the  mercury,  if  neces- 
sary, reduced  to  2  grains. 

I   prefer   to   use  the   Compound   Podophyllin   Pills: 

Podophyllin     6  grains 

Compound  extract  of  colocynth 30  grains 

Powdered    rhubarb     48  grains 

Extract  of  henbane    36  grains 

Mix  and  divide  into  twenty-four  pills.     One  pill  to  dog  up  to  20  lbs., 
two   pills   to   larger  ones. 

If  the  bowels  be  not  freely  opened  after  administering  the  first  pill  a 
close  of  salts  and  senna  (black  draught)  should  be  given;  on  the  other 
hand,  if  diarrhea  exists  it  must  be  checked.  In  conjunction  with  the  pills 
the  following  mixture  should  be  tried: 

Mixture  for  Jaundice. — Take  bromide  of  potassium,  1  dram;  taraza- 
cum  (dandelion)  juice,  3  ounces;  mix,  and  give  a  teaspoonful  three  times 
a  day  in  water  or  gruel.     This  dose  is  for  a  dog  about  20   lb.  weight,  for 


DISEASES  99 

a  50  lb.  or  larger  dog  give  a  two  teaspoonful  dose.  Benefit  is  also  derived 
from  the  administration  of  30  grains  to  60  grains  of  sulphate  of  potassium 
in  water.  The  dose  may  be  repeated  in  twenty-four  hours,  but  must  not 
be  continued  long  enough  to  cause  excessive  purging. 

When,  as  in  chronic  inflammation,  the  liver  is  enlarged,  the  Liniment 
for  Sprains,  equal  parts  of  spirits  of  turpentine,  liquid  ammonia  (not  the 
strongest),  laudanum  and  rape  oil,  well  rubbed  round  the  region  of  the 
diseased  organ,  or  a  strong  mustard  plaster  applied.  Another  method  of 
affording  relief  is  to  take  a  piece  of  flannel,  dip  it  in  hot  water,  wring  the 
water  out,  pour  some  spirit  of  turpentine  over  the  material,  and  apply  to 
the  affected  part.  It  is  very  important  that  the  bowels  should  be  freely 
relieved  at  the  outset,  and  if  the  means  advised  above  prove  unsuccessful, 
it  would  be  well  to  resort  to  clysters  of  oatmeal  gruel  and  castor  oil.  The 
diet  is  very  important  throughout  the  attack.  Must  be  light  and  nourishing, 
and  in  a  fluid  or  sloppy  form.  Boiled  wheat  flour,  with  beef  tea  or  mutton 
broth,  is  very  good.     Keep  dog  warm,  dry,  and  disturbed  as  little  as  possible. 

Kennel  Lameness,  or  Chest-Founder. —  (See  Rheumatism,  also.) — This 
is  a  rheumatic  affection  of  the  forequarters,  and  particularly  of  the  muscles 
connecting  the  shoulder-blade  with  the  trunk.  It  is  caused  by  exposure  to 
wet  and  cold,  and  generally  by  the  dog  being  kept  in  damp  or  draughty 
kennels.  The  symptoms  are  stiffness  and  soreness  of  one  or  both  shoul- 
ders. This  is  most  noticeable  when  the.  dog  is  running  down  hill,  or  when 
jumping,  as  of  course  then  practically  the  whole  of  the  weight  of  the  body 
is  on  these  parts.  Left  to  himself,  the  dog  shows  an  indisposition  to  move, 
and  experiences  pain  if  the  hand  is  passed  over  his  shoulders;  indeed,  even 
when  a  attempt  is  made  to  touch  him,  he  shrinks  from  the  hand  with  a 
snarl  or  anticipatory  cry  of  pain.  In  long-standing  cases  power  of  move- 
ment of  the  forequarters  is  almost  lost,  and  many  are  incurable. 

The  treatment  most  advised  is  to  give  a  warm  bath,  and  after  thor- 
oughly drying,  rub  the  parts  well  with  a  liniment  composed  of  equal  parts 
spirit  of  turpentine,  spirit  of  hartshorn,  and  laudanum.  If  that  should 
fail  to  give  relief  the  following  should  be  tried: 

Liniment  for  Rheumatism.— Take  liniment  of  aconite,  1  part;  com- 
pound camphor  liniment,  2  parts;  mix,  and  rub  into  the  affected  parts  con- 
tinuously for  half  an  hour  at  a  time,  using  considerable  friction.  The 
rheumatic  liniment  is  expensive,  also  a  powerful  poison,  so  that  great  care 
must  be  used  with  it. 

The  dog's  coat  should  be  wiped  dry  after  applying  it,  and  it  is  advisable 
that  he  should  wear  a  canvas-faced  muzzle.  The  bowels  should  be  freely 
acted  on,  and  the  Compound  Podophyllin  Pills  (find  prescription  under 
Asthma)  will  be  the  best  aperient.  This  pill  given  once  will  probably  be 
enough.  A  little  warm  broth  after  given  will  assist  its  action.  The  fol- 
lowing mixture  should  also  be  given: 

Mixture  for  Rheumatism. — Take  iodide  of  potassium,  y2  dram;  sweet 
spirit  of  nitre,  Y2  ounce;  water,  3%  ounces.  Give  one  to  two  dessert- 
spoonfuls for  a  dose,  twice  a  day. 

Even  more  useful  than  the  mixture  recommended,  is  salicylate  of 
sodium   in    10   grain   to   30   grain   doses,   in   water,   three   times   a   day.      If 


100  -  -i  -  -r  •  -  -i  -  DISEASES 

this  fail,  then  try   5  grains  to  15  grains  of  benzoic  acid  in  pill  form,  twice 

a-day. 

The  food  shoufd  be  sloppy  and  nourishing,  and  the  dog  be  kept  in  a 
warm,  dry  place,  free  from  draught. 

Kidneys,    Inflammation   of   the This    is    fortunately    not    often    found 

in  the  dog.  It  is  a  disease  of  a  very  dangerous  nature.  The  symptoms  are 
intense  fever,  great  pains  across  the  loins,  a  peculiar  straddling  gait  and  the 
ineffectual  or  partial  effort  to  pass  urine,  the  quantity  being  small  and 
sometimes  mixed  with  blood.  It  may  be  caused  by  the  presence  of  stone, 
by  blows  or  sprains  in  the  lumbar  region,  or  due  as  a  result  of  having 
administered  overdoses  of  turpentine,  cantharides,  or  other  powerful  exci- 
tants of  the  urinary  organs.  It  is  safest  and  advisable  to  call  in  a  qualified 
veterinarian  in  this  trouble.  Relief  can  be  given  by  continuous  bathing  of 
the  surrounding  parts  with  warm  water,  relieving  the  bowels,  and  re- 
ducing the  attendant  fever  by  daily  doses  of  (12  grains  for  an  ordinary  dog) 
of  Dover's  Powder,  and  the  constant  use  of  the  following  fever  mixture: 

Powdered    nitre    1        dram 

Sweet  spirits  of  nitre    y2    ounce 

Mindererous    spirit    ' 1  yz  ounce 

Wine  or  antimony    1        dram 

Water     4        ounces 

Mix;  dose  for  a  20  lb.  to  40  lb.  dog,  one  tablespoonful  every  four 
hours  in  a  little  gruel.  Larger  dogs  like  St.  Bernards  a  table- 
spoonful  and  a  half  as  a  dose. 

Keeping  Flies  Off  Ear  and  Nose. — Flies  often  bother  a  dog's  ear  and 
nose  in  summer,  making  sore  places.  Pine  tar  rubbed  on  the  sore  places 
will  do  this  nicely,  also  healing  up  the  sores  at  same  time.  You  can  get 
a  box  of  it  at  any  drug  store  for  10  cents,  or  Eberhart's  Skin  Cure  applied 
twice  daily  will  do  the  work  as  well. 

Lice. — See  Parasites  External. 

Lice. — There  are  two  kinds  of  lice  which  infest  dogs,  and  both  of 
them  are  quite  similar  to  those  infesting  man.  One,  the  Haematopinus 
piliferus,  is  generally  found  about  the  throat  and  back  of  the  ears,  but  may 
extend  over  all  parts  of  the  body.  The  female  is  two  mm.  long,  in  color 
a  yellowish  white,  the  head  being  a  little  darker  than  the  body.  The  male 
is  1.15  mm.  long.  The  head  is  short  and  as  wide  as  it  is  long.  It  is  salient 
and  is  exactly  applied  to  the  thorax.  The  third  and  fourth  articles  of  the 
antennae  are  alike.  The  female  is  about  2  mm.  in  length.  The  abdomen 
is  a  long  oval  in  shape  and  well  developed.  It  is  made  up  of  nine  round 
segments,  the  first  seven  having  two  rows  of  short  bristles.  The  other 
louse  (Trichodectes  latus)  is  a  bright  yellow,  with  dark  spots,  with  blackish 
brown  bands  on  the  head.  The  female  in  length  is  1.5  mm.,  the  male  1.4 
mm.     The  head  is  wider  than  it  is  long.     The  antennae  are  hairy  and  differ- 


DISEASES  101 

ent  In  both  sexes,  the  first  article  in  the  male  being  much  thicker  than 
the  other.  The  abdomen  is  broad  and  more  rounded  in  the  female  than  in 
the  male  and  has  lateral  but  no  median  spots. 

Lice  live  in  all  parts  of  the  body — the  roots  of  the  ears,  around  the  eyes 
and  all  about  the  head  and  face,  as  well  as  along  the  top  of  the  back.  They 
spt  up  an  irritation  that  causes  the  dog  to  scratch  and  worry  continually, 
and  if  the  skin  be  closely  examined  streaks  and  dots  of  blood  will  indicate 
the  feeding  places  of  these  pests,  which  are  easily  discerned  creeping  about. 

The  rapidity  with  which  lice  multiply  is  marvelous.  Independent  of 
the  destructive  influences  which  restrain  their  multiplying,  it  is  estimated 
that  the  descendants  in  the  third  generation  of  one  female  louse  will  num- 
ber 125,000.  v 

The  most  effectual  and  the  safest  remedy  for  the  destruction  of  lice 
is  a  lime  and  sulphur  lotion.  The  skin  should  be  thoroughly  saturated 
with  it  for  ten  or  fifteen  minutes,  and  at  the  end  of  this  time  the  dog 
should  be  given  a  bath  in  lukewarm  water,  a  standard  dog  soap  being 
used.  He  should  then  be  brushed  and  combed  until  thoroughly  dried. 
Covering  the  dog  with  a  mixture  of  cotton  seed  oil  and  crude  coal  oil  in 
equal  parts  and  then  washing  the  dog  at  the  end  of  a  half  hour  with  warm 
water  and  dog  soap  will  kill  eithpr  fleas  or  lice. 

Eberhart's  Skin  Remedy  will  kill  lice.  It  should  be  thoroughly  rub- 
bed in,  not  missing  a  spot  on  the  dog.  After  it  has  been  on  half  an  hour, 
then  the  dog  can  be  washed  and  dried;  this  bath  only  given  to  remove  the 
grease,  if  it  is  a  house  pet.  .  If  in  warm  weather,  and  dog  can  be  kept  out 
in  the  yard,  the  bath  is  not  necessary.  The  application  must  be  repeated 
at  least  once  more,  In  twenty-four  hours,  to  kill  the  nits  or  the  young 
ones  that  are  born  every  twenty-four  hours.  My  dog  soap  will  kill  lice, 
if  you  apply  it  thoroughly,  and  allow  it  to  remain  on  (and  repeat  once  or 
twice  more. 

For  pet  or  house  dogs  the  insect  powders  generally  made  from  the 
powdered  flowers  of  pyrethrum  roseum  will  be  found  most  convenient. 
Unfortunately  their  expense  precludes  their  general  use  in  kennels.  The 
powder  must  be  well  rubbed  into  the  roots  of  the  hair  or  blown  in  with  a 
small  bellows,  made  for  that  purpose,  that  is  of  assistance  in  spreading  it 
well  around  the  roots  of  the  hair.  After  allowing  it  to  remain  on  some 
time — fifteen  minutes  to  one  hour — it  can  be  dusted  out  over  a  sheet  of  pa- 
per, which  can  then  be  rolled  up  and  burned. 

Lock-Jaw  (Tetanus) — This  is  of  very  rare  occurrence,  a  fact  all  the 
more  remarkable  when  we  consider  how  liable  the  dog  is  to  various  spas- 
modic affections.  I  have  never  seen  a  case  of  it  myself,  but  Blaine  describes 
it,  and  it  is  a  recognized  canine  disease.  It  is  a  form  of  tetanus,  and  under 
that  head  Professor  J.  Woodroffe  Hill  describes  the  symptoms:  "When  the 
jaws  only  are  affected,  the  head  is  poked  out,  the  jaws  are  tightly  closed, 
the  angles  of  the  mouth  are  drawn  back,  the  mouth  is  filled  with  frothy 
saliva,  and  the  eyes  are  fixed  in  an  unnatural  and  often  hideous  position." 

If  you  are  so  unfortunate  as  to  have  a  dog  seized  with  lock-jaw,  place 
him  in  quiet  place  on  a  good  bed  where  the  light  is  subdued  and  he  will 
not  be  liable   to  be   disturbed,   and   send   at  once   for   the  best  veterinary 


102  DISEASES 

surgeon  you  can  find.  A  cure  is  very  doubtful,  even  with  the  most  skilled 
treatment;  but,  as  a  matter  of  duty  and  humanity,  try  and  help  your  dog 
through  this  most  dangerous  trouble  if  it  is  possible.  All  owners  of  dogs 
should  keep  informed  as  to  the  veterinarians  in  their  town  or  city,  as  to 
which  one  is  experienced  in  canine  practice,  so  that  when  a  case  is  urgent, 
you  will  know  what  one  to  call  in  and  just  where  to  find  him.  Officious 
ignorance  and  rough  handling  would  only  cause  pain  without  the  remotest 
hope  of  good  results. 

Looseness  of  the  Bowels — See  Diarrhea  and  Dysentery. 

Lumbago. — See  Rheumatism. 

Leucorrhoea. — Use  as  an  injection  peroagina  sulphate  of  zinc,  %  dram; 
acetate  of  lead,  Vz  dram  to  a  pint  of  water.  One  injection  per  day,  except 
in  bad  cases  it  can  be  used  twice  daily. 

Lacteal  Tumors. — No  better  treatise  on  this  trouble  can  be  given  than 
Dalziel's: 

"Every  dog  owner  must  know  what  a  common  <:hing  it  is  to  see  a  bitch 
with  an  enlargement  of  one  of  her  teats,  or  the  structures  adjoining  them. 
Now,  not  only  is  such  very  unsightly,  but  when  grown  to  a  considerable 
Size,  as  it  will  do,  it  is  very  liable  to  injury. 

"The  immediate  cause  is  the  damming  up  of  one  of  the  milk-ducts; 
the  teat  is  'blind,'  as  it  is  called  in  dairy  parlance — that  is,  the  flow  of 
milk  through  it  is  obstructed  by  some  malformation.  Far  oftener,  however, 
the  milk  itself  is  the  cause;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  not  drained  off  sufficiently, 
when  it  hardens,  acts  as  a  foreign  body,  and  still  further  as  an  irritant,  be- 
cause of  its  chemical  decomposition.  The  effect  of  this  is  that  more  or  less 
inflammation  of  the  milk-gland  is  produced,  a  hard  lump  forms  and  increases 
gradually,  and  once  begun,  the  evil  develops  more  and  more  at  each  return- 
ing period  after  oestrum,  when  pupping  has  or  should  have  taken  place. 

"From  the  numerous  questions  I  have  received  on  the  subject  it  does 
not  appear  to  be  generally  known  by  those  who  keep  dogs  that  some  bitches, 
even  if  they  have  been  secluded  from  the  dog  during  the  period  of  'heat,' 
will  secrete  a  fluid  much  resembling  milk  at  the  time  they  would  have  had 
pups  had  impregnation  been  allowed,  but  such  is  the  case.  It  is,  therefore, 
the  duty  of  the  owner  to  note  the  time  and  look  out  for  the  evidence  of 
this  secretion  and  have  it  removed  by  hand,  or  by  one  of  the  many  breast- 
exhausters,  giving  at  the  same  time  a  light  diet,  with  an  extra  proportion  of 
boiled  vegetables  and  a  few  doses  of  cooling,  aperient  medicine.  Permit- 
ting a  bitch  when  in  milk  to  lie  on  cold  bricks  or  flags,  or  to  be  exposed  in 
other  ways  to  cold  and  damp,  may  also  cause  obstruction  af  the  teat  and 
subsequent  tumors;  while  blows,  bruises  and  wounds  sometimes  produce  a 
like  result.  A  not  uncommon  cause  of  these  lacteal  tumors  Is  the  hurried 
drying  up  of  the  milk  by  artificial  means.  It  is  sometimes  desirable  to 
destroy  pups  that  are  the  result  of  a  mesalliance,  but  it  is  absolutely  cruel 
to  deprive  the  poor  mother  of  all  her  progeny.     In  addition  to  the  cruelty, 


DISEASES  103 

there  is  always  the  risk  of  the  flow  of  milk  clamming  up  one  or  more  of  the 
teats  and  producing  tumor. 

"The  measure  of  prevention  against  lacteal  tumors  will,  from  the 
foregoing  remarks,  have  suggested  themselves  to  the  reader.  Nature  has 
ordained  that  the  bitch  should  bring  forth  young  at  least  once  in  twelve 
months,  and,  though  she  permits  us  to  take  certa'n  liberties  with  her  laws, 
yet  if  we  go  beyond  a  certain  limit,  disease  follows  as  a  punishment;  even 
when  we  interfere  with  her  prerogative,  it  must  not  be  by  direct  contradic- 
tion, but  by  diverting  her  forces  into  other  channels.  When  we  forbid  the 
bitch  to  breed  we  put  an  embargo  on  certain  functions,  and  the  energy 
that  supplies  and  works  these  functions  we  divert  by  exciting  extra  secre- 
tions of  the  bowels,  kidneys,  etc.;  but  the  safest,  because  the  most  natural, 
prevention  of  disease,  is  to  let  the  bitch  breed. 

"When  it  is  desired  to  'dry'  the  bitch,  that  is,  to  stop  the  secretion  of 
milk,  it  is  wrong  to  give  alum  and  other  astringents,  and  to  rub  brandy, 
etc.,  along  the  mammae.  The  object  is  more  surely  obtained  gradually, 
and  that  without  the  risk  of  untoward  results,  by  drawing  off  what  m,-lk 
there  is  regularly,  giving  a  spare  diet,  and  a  good  purge,  following  this 
with  2  grains  to  3  grains  of  iodide  of  potassium,  twice  a  day,  and  rubbing 
well  with  the  following  liniment: 

L'niment  for  Drying  Bitches. — Iod'de  of  potassium,  2  drams;  soap  lini- 
ment and  oil  of  camphor,  of  each  2  ounces. 

When  a  tumor  does  form,  and  the  bitch  is  still  in  milk,  draw  the  milk 
off  twice  a  day,  and  in  any  case,  give  a  brisk  purge.  Keep  her  on  a  spare, 
and  rather  dry  diet,  and  to  one  of  20  lb.  weight  give  twice  a  day  2  grains 
of  iodide  of  potassium,  in  about  two  tablespoonfuls  of  water,  immediately 
after  feeding,  and  apply  twice  Or  thrice  a  day  the  following  ointment  to 
the  lumps  or  swelling  i 

pi'ifmeut  for  Lacteal  Tumors: 

Iodide  of  potassium   ,,,,,,,,,,,      1  Arnux 

powdered   camphor    ,.,,,,,.,...      1  dram 

Strong  mercurial  ointment   ,,,,,,,.,...........    V2  ounce 

Spermaceti  ointment    .,,,...... .  1  oinwn 

Mixed,     Rub  a  little  W©il  in  with  gentle  friGUct). 

If  these  means  do  not  prove  sufficient  for  the  dispersion  of  the  swell- 
ing, add  to  the  above  ointment  2  scr,  of  resublimcd  iodine  dissolved  in,  a, 
little  spirit  of  wine. 

When  the  swelling  has  gone  on  so  far  unheeded  that  matter  is  formed, 
and  becomes  soft  and  ripe  (which  may  be  told  by  the  fluctuating  of  the 
enlargement  under  pressure  of  the  finders  \  there  is  nothing  for  it  but  the 
lancet,  which  should  be  inserted  in  the  soft  1  a.  t,  and  a  cut  made  downwards, 
to  insure  perfect  drainage.  The  parts  must  then  be  frequently  bathed,  the 
matter  pressed  out,  washed  with  a  solution  of  Condy's  FluM,  and  dressed 
with  Turner's  cerate,  while  the  pat;ent  should  havo  a  g^orl  ctrcn~  purg*. 
These  growths  are  often,  removed  by  the  knife,  and  when  of.  long  standing 


104  DISEASES 

that  is  the  only  course.     Camphorated  Oil  is  also  used  in  such  cases,  and 
for  drying  up  the  milk  I  have  found  it  very  satisfactory. 

Dent  treats  this  subject  as  follows: 

"Nature  has  ordained  that  at  least  once  a  year  certain  nervous  energies 
in  the  female  clog  be  set  in  motion.  This  nervous  force  excites  the  bowels, 
the  brain,  the  kidneys,  the  circulation,  and  all  the  other  organs  "of  the  body, 
and  what  is  known  as  the  period  of  oestrum,  or  being  in  season,  is  the 
result.  If  the  bitch  be  bred  at  this  time  a  natural  function  is  performed 
and  a  natural  law  satisfied.  If  she  is  not  bred  these  functions  are  seriously 
interfered  with  for  the  time,  how  seriously  or  the  extent  of  the  interference 
we  do  not  know.  That  this  nervous  action  does  not  cease  or  is  entirely 
suppressed  by  simply  putting  the  bitch  by  for  the  time  is  unmistakably 
denied  by  subsequent  events.  A  natural  prerogative  asserts  itself  and  it  is 
a  common  occurrence  for  bitches  which  have  not  been  bred  to  develop 
a  feverish  disturbance  of  the  system,  a  swelling  of  the  milk  glands  and  the 
secretion  of  a  whitish  fluid  resembling  milk  at  the  time  they  would  have 
given  birth  to  puppies  if  they  had  been  bred. 

"If  this  milky  fluid  is  not  drawn  off  with  the  breast  pump  there  is 
danger  of  its  hardening  and  forming  a  lacteal  tumor.  In  passing  a  bitch 
over  the  period  of  oestrum  without  breeding  her,  it  would  be  well  for  all 
breeders  to  anticipate  the  possibility  of  this  secretion;  watch  for  it  at 
the  proper  time.  Remove  it  if  it  appears  and  feed  for  the  time  a  light, 
cooling  diet  of  stale  bread  or  dog  biscuits  softened  in  soup  or  milk,  with  an 
increased  amount  of  vegetables,  and  keep  the  bowels  open  with  doses  of 
cascara  sagrada  and  olive  oil  as  often  as  may  be  necessary.  In  cases  of 
a  misalliance  the  puppies  are  frequently  destroyed  at  birth.  This  is  posi- 
tively cruel  to  the  mother  and  the  shock  to  her  nervous  system  is  so  great  as 
to  frequently  affect  her  constitution.  The  puppies  should  be  taken  away  as 
previously  stated,  one  or  two  at  a  time,  and  the  milk  dried  up,  with  the 
same  care  as  if  the  puppies  were  to  be  raised. 

"Lacteal  tumors  sometimes  result  from  blows,  wounds,  kicks  and  other 
injuries;  exposure  to  the  cold,  sudden  chills  from  lying  on  damp  straw  or 
upon  cold  bricks  or  cement  floors.  The  great  proportion  of  cases,  however,  is 
due  to  the  causes,  first  mentioned. 

"Treatment. — To  dry  a  bitch  up  properly  and  prevent  the  formation  of 
milk  tumors  after  removing  the  puppies  as  previously  described,  keep  the 
bowels  open  with  cascara  sagrada  and  olive  oil;  feed  a  spare  diet  or  raw, 
lean  beef,  chopped  fine,  milk,  gelatin,  eggs,  stale  bread  or  dog  biscuits  soaked 
in  thin  soup.  If  there  is  any  milk  remaining  in  the  gland  draw  it  off 
night  and  morning  with  a  breast  pump. 

"Apply  the  following  liniment  three  times  a  day,  with  gentle  massage: 
Camphorated  oil  four  ounces,  fluid  extract  of  belladonna  three  drams,  soap 
liniment  two  ounces,  witch  hazel  two  ounces. 

"Give  a  thirty-pound  dog  a  capsule  containing  of  the  iodide  of  potash 
three  grains,  pepsin   three  grains,  gentian  three  grains,  diastase  one  grain. 

"For  the  removal  of  lacteal  tumors  the  following  ointment  is  recom- 
mended: Iodide  of  potassium  two  drams,  powdered  camphor  two  grains, 
mercurial  ointment  two  drams,   iodine  resub  ten  grains,  five  grains  of  men- 


r DISEASES  105 

thol  alcohol  q.  s.,  lanolin  three  ounces.  Apply  three  times  a  clay  and  rub  well 
into  the  skin  with  gentle  friction.  The  capsules  previously  mentioned 
should  also  be  given  three  times  a  day. 

"Tumors  that  do  not  yield  to  the  treatment,  or  have  been  let  go  so 
far  as  to  become  ripe  or  full  of  matter,  can  only  be  treated  with  the 
knife.  Operations  should  only  be  entrusted  to  a  veterinary  surgeon,  who 
will  insert  the  lancet  at  the  softest  spot  of  the  enlargement  and  drain  off 
the  contents,  afterward  inserting  a  pledget  of  oakum  which  should  be 
changed  daily.  Large  tumors  that  do  not  soften  should  be  dissected  out 
entire  and  the  wound  properly  dressed." 

Labor,  Premature. — This  is  occasionally  caused  by  over  exertion,  leap- 
ing from  a  high  place,  injuries  and  the  abuse  of  purgatives,  as  well  as  the. 
result  of  diseased  organs;  it  is  not  of  very  frequent  occurrence,  bitches 
generally  whelping  exactly  sixty-three  days  after  the  visit  to  the  dog,  al- 
though there  are  numerous  instances  where  the  time  is  varied  more  or 
less.  When  it  does  occur  the  bitch  should  be  placed  in  a  comfortable 
room  and  kept  perfectly  quiet,  fed  on  broth,  porridge,  &c,  and  repeated 
doses,  one  every  four  or  five  hours,  of  opium,  should  be  given.  See  also 
Parturition. 

Lameness  may  arise  from  a  cut  foot,  a  thorn,  injury  to  the  spine,  or 

to  one  of  the  limbs  or  joints  or  from  rheumatism,  when  it  comes  on 
suddenly,  seek  for  the  cause,  and  treat  the  case  accordingly,  the  liniment 
for  sprains  very  likely  to  be  of  benefit  in  many  of  such  cases. 

Laryngitis,  or  Inflammation  of  the  Upper  Part  of  the  "Windpipe. — This 
common  affection  is  caused  by  cold  or  incessant  barking,  the  dog  becomes 
hoarse  and  the  power  to  bark  articulately  is  gone.  Yard  dogs  kept  con- 
stantly on  chain,  and  very  wrong  to  so  keep  any  dog,  are  very  liable  to 
contract  this  from  straining  on  their  collar  in  barking  and  trying  to  get  at 
somebody  or  something  it  sees.  In  treating  laryngitis  there  is  danger  of 
choking  the  dog  in  drenching  because  of  the  difficulty  in  swallowing  caused 
by  the  inflammation.  The  following  electuary  in  this  or  any  case  of  sore 
throat  will  be  found  safer  and  very  beneficial: 

Chlorate  of  potash,  finely  powdered 2   drams 

Powdered   gum    guaicum    1   dram 

Powdered   gum   acacia    ' 1   dram 

Oxymel   of   squills    5   drams 

Honey    1   ounce 

Mix,  and  place  a  teaspoonful  well  back  on  the  tongue  three  times  a 
day. 

Poultice  the  throat  with  hot  linseed  meal  poultices,  renewed  often,  or 
bathe  with  hot  water,  and  afterwards  rubbed  well  in  the  following  liniment: 

Spirit  of  turpentine .  .  ,  , 1   ounce 

Spirit   of  hartshorn     ..  .,,,,,,,,,,,,,.,,,  ,    X   ounce 

Tincture   of  cantharldes    %   ounce 

Rape  oil   , ,,,,,,  1  ft  ounoes 


10«  DISEASES 

Here  is  a  case  prescribed  for  by  Dent: 

"I  have  an  English  setter  dog  about  twenty  months  old  that  acts  as 
though  he  had  something  in  his  throat.  It  affects  his  breathing,  and  when 
he  first  showed  symptoms  of  it  his  eyes  were  red  and  ran  matter.  He 
eats  sometimes,  but  at  others  will  not  eat;  is  healthy  and  bright.  I  can  put 
my  finger  under  his  throat  and  press  very  lightly,  and  it  almost  shuts  off 
his  wind.  It  seems  as  though  there  was  a  kind  of  bunch  in  his  throat 
that  is  not  natural.  (1)  Would  inflammation  of  the  larynx  cause  it? 
(2)  Is  there  such  a  thing  as  a  tumor  of  the  larynx?  I  had  him  in  swim- 
ming about  four  weeks  ago,  and  when  he  was  in  the  water  his  breathing 
sounded  like  the  voice  of  a  frog.  Please  diagnose  and  prescribe.  Ans.— 
(1)  Yes.  (2)  Yes.  Your  dog  has  laryngitis;  give  the  following:  Glycrrhiza 
two  drams,  muriate  of  ammonia  one  dram,  tincture  opium  thirty  minims, 
water  to  make  two  ounces;   dose  one  teaspoonful  every  four  houri." 

Lungs,  Inflammation  of  (Pneumonia;  Pleurisy — Inflammation  of  the 
Investing  Membrane  of  the  Lungs,  and  that  which  lines  the  Chest-CaYity — 
&c.) — On  this  subject  I  give  Dalziel's  treatment  complete. 

These  two  diseases  are  sometimes  co-existent,  when  it  is  known  as 
pleuro-pneumonia.  It  would  be  too  much  to  expect  an  amateur  to  distin- 
guish between  them;  but  as  the  causes  and  treatment  are  much  the  same, 
I  shall  continue  to  treat  them  as  one  disease.  This  disease  is  of  very  com- 
mon occurrence  in  dogs,  and  in  many  cases  proves  fatal.  When  it  exists  as 
a  complication  of  distemper  it  is  known  as  "chest  distemper;"  but  other 
Of  the  respiratory  organs  may  be  involved. 

The  causes  producing  inflammation  of  the  lungs  are  generally  exposure 
to  gevere  cold,  allowing  dogs  to  swim  during  inclement  weather,  clipping 
dogs  or  otherwise  removing  a  greater  part  of  their  natural  covering,  or 
washing  them  and  afterwards  exposing  them  to  excessive  cold,  especially 
If  not  thoroughly  dried.  In  fact,  any  sudden  transition  from  a  high  to 
a  low  temperature  may  produce  it,  especially  in  dogs  of  a  delicate  consti- 
tution and  unused  to  roughing  it.  Again,  it  may  occur  from  over-exertion 
through  running  too  far,  or  from  fractured  ribs  penetrating  the  lung-tissue. 

The  more  notable  symptoms  are  quick  and  labored  breathing,  the  in* 
spirations  being  full,  the  expirations  short,  and  the  breath  hot.  The  dog 
sits  on  his  haunches,  and  if  obliged  to  move  doeg  so  reluctantly,  and  soon 
resumes  that  position,  with  his  head  pushed  forward.  The  ribs  are  mora 
or  less  fixed,  and  the  abdominal  muscles  brought  Into  action,  especially  If 
pleurisy  is  present.  The  fixed  position  of  the  ribs,  with  the  heaving  of  the 
flanks,  is  a  most  characteristic  symptom  of  pleurisy.  In  affections  of  the 
lungs,  the  animal  stands  with  its  legs  (fore  legs)  wide  apart.  If  the  dis- 
ease progresses,  the  face  has  a  haggard  expression,  the  angle  of  the  mouth 
is  drawn  up,  and  the  extremities  become  deathly  cold.  If  not  relieved,  the 
dog  rapidly  gets  worse,  and  the  breathing  becomes  more  labored  and  painful. 

Pleurisy,  or  inflammation  of  the  investing  membrane  of  the  lungs,  often 
exists  independently,  or  as  a  complication  of  pneumonia.  To  treat  this 
disease  with  any  chance  of  success  it  is  important  that  the  dog  should  be 
kept  where  he  can  freely  breathe  fresh,  cool,  a!r;  a  hot.  stiflin*  place  is 
equally  to  be  avoided  with  a  damp  or  draughty  one.    Whilst  cool,  fresh  air 


DISEASES  107 

i«  insured,  the  patient  must  at  the  same  time  be  kept  warm  by  clothing:  if 
necessary;  it  is  also  needful  that  he  should  be  as  little  distrubed  as  possible. 
If  the  legs  are  cold,  woollen  bandages  should  be  placed  on  all  of  them.  The 
diet  should  be  rather  low  at  first,  but  not  too  much  so — broth,  gruel,  etc., 
are  suitable  under  the  circumstances. 

In  the  way  of  medicines,  it  is  necessary  that  the  bowels  should  be  kept 
open  by  castor  oil  or  the  use  of  clysters.  The  Fever  Mixture — which  find 
given  under  Catarrh,  should  be  immediately  and  diligently  administered. 

Blisters  to  the  sides,  as  sometimes  advised,  are  bad,  as  they  cause 
soreness  and  increase  the  pain  in  breathing.  Hot -linseed  poultices  should 
alone  be  employed  throughout  the  day  and  night.  If  the  fever  is  high,  give 
%  to  1  drop  of  tincture  of  aconite  every  fifteen  minutes  for  two  hours,  then 
hourly  for  eight  hours. 

Dogs  recovering  from  this  disease  are  always  very  weak,  and  require 
very  great  care  to  prevent  a  relapse,  even  when  all  danger  appears  to  be 
gone.  Only  the  most  gentle  exercise  should  be  allowed  at  first,  and  fine 
weather  selected  for  it.  The  dog  will  require  nourishing  diet,  which  should 
be  plain,  and  consist  for  a  time  of  broths,  etc.  a  return  to  solid  food 
being  gradual.  The  dog  will  at  this  stage  be  greatly  benefited  by  tonics 
and  to  build  him  up  use  either  Eberhart's  Tonic  Pills,  or  Sergeant's  Con- 
dition Pills. 

Mange — A  troublesome,  and,  in  some  forms,  the  most  loathsome  dis- 
ease met  with  in  the  dog,  occurring  in  so  many  forms  as  to  be  not  always 
easy  of  distinction.  The  trouble  with  too  many  dog  owners  is,  that,  when 
any  skin  trouble  appears  they  are  most  likely  to  call  it  Mange.  Mange  and 
Eczema  are  too  often  confounded,  and,  as  there  is  a  decided  difference, 
mange  being  a  skin  trouble,  due  to  a  parasite,  while  eczema  is  a  blood 
trouble,  the  two  diseases  require  different  treatment.  The  term  mange,  as 
applied  to  animals,  is  identical  with  itch  in  the  human  race,  in  both  of 
which  exist  parasite  life  in  the  skin,  and  is  a  cutaneous  disease.  The  very 
pronounced  distinction  between  true  mange  and  eczema,  and  other  causes 
of  irritation  of  the  skin,  is  that  mange  is  caused  by  a  parasite  invisible  to 
the  naked  eye,  and  that  it  is  transferable  by  contact,  from  one  animal  to 
another,  while  eczema,  blotch,  surfiet  or  red  mange,  is  not.  And,  while  a 
whole  kennel  may  be  suffering  from  the  latter  compalints,  it  must  be  be- 
cause all  have  been  subjected  to  conditions  of  life  occasioning  derange- 
ment of  the  system,  eczema  remains  an  individual  disease,  and  is  never 
transmitted.  True  mange  resembles  itch  in  man,  as  it  is  due  to  a  small 
parasite  that  burrows  or  tunnels  through  the  skin  in  all  directions,  draw- 
ing its  nourishment  therefrom.  The  female  deposits  her  eggs  In  the  canals 
formed,  which  hatch  out  in  about  two  weeks;  the  young  continue  bur- 
rowing and  occasion  intense  itching.  True  mange  is  entirely  a  local  affec- 
tion, and  the  uneasiness  and  loss  of  sleep  causes  the  animal  to  continually 
scratch  and  bite  itself  in  Its  vain  efforts  to  allay  the  intolerable  pain  and 
itching.  This  has  a  very  debilitating  effect  upon  the  system,  and  will  soon 
transform   a   healthy  and  sleek   coated  pet  into  a  loathsome  object. 

The  cause  is  invariably  the  result  of  having   met  some  dog  or  other 
animal  that  w*§  affected  with  mange.    One  dog  meeting  another  or  occu- 


108  DISEASES  r      '     '       '  "">~"1 

pying  his  kennel  or  sleeping  quarters,  or  being  shipped  in  a  crate  that 
was  used  by  a  dog  with  mango,  will  surely  contract  it.  Absolute  clean- 
liness is  necessary  in  the  treatment  of  mange.  When  your  dog  shows 
signs  of  mange,  remove  it  immediately  from  its  quarters  to  new  ones, 
burn  the  bedding  it  has  used,  wash  its  kennel  with  boiling  water,  to  which 
has  been  added  the  Standard  Disinfectant,  or  Sanitas  (See  advertisement 
of  both  in  this  book).  Either  one,  if  thoroughly  applied,  will  destroy 
every  parasite  in  the  kennel. 

Now  give  your  dog  a  good  bath  with  Eberhart's  Dog  Soap,  using  quite  as 
Warm  water  as  the  dog  c ■ : i ii  stand,  cleansing  its  entire  body  and  opening  the 
pores  of  the  skin.  After  drying  the  dog  thoroughly,  then  apply  Eberhart's 
Skin  Cure  all  over  the  dog,  rubbing  it  in  well  with  your  bands  and  not. 
missing  a  spot  on  tbe  dog's  body,  for  if  yon  do  you  leave  some  parasites 
— a  very  busy  and  industrious  pest  they  are — and  in  a  day  later  many  new- 
born ones  would  be  hard  at  work  again.  Take  plenty  Of  lime  in  putting 
on  'this  skin  cure,  using  "plenty  of  elbow  grease,*'  applying  it  the  same 
as  you  would  a  liniment.  Repeal  this  the  next  day,  and  probably  Eor  two 
days  more,  the  bath  not  being  strictly  essential  except  the  first  day.  If 
you  wish,  or  the  dog  is  a  house  dog.  you  can  give  It  a  bath  after  the  skin 
cure  has  been  on  for  ball'  an  hour,  for  it  has  then  done  its  work,  this  bath 
simply  to  put  the  dog  in  more  presentable  and  cleaner  shape,  as  all  skin 
or  mange  cures  contain  oil  of  some  kind  and  are  therefore  greasy.  There 
are  several   good   mange  cures  aside   I'tom   mine. 

Ordinarily  a  case  of  mange  should  be  cured  in  a  week  or  two,  and 
after  three  or  four  applications  all  over  the  dog,  it  is  only  necessary  to 
apply  it  daily  to  the  sore  places,  or  where  no  hair,  as  my  skin  remedy  is, 
also,  a  great  hair  grower,  and  never  fails  to  restore  the  hair,  unless  tbe 
hair  roots  have  been  destroyed — when  nothing  will  bring  back  the  hair. 
It  is  not  necessary  to  change  the  food  in  treating  mange. 

A  very  good  mange  euro  is  the  following: 

Train  oil    ""4    gallon 

Venice  turpentine    2  ounces 

Oil   of  tar    y2    ounce 

Lac   Sulphur    • 1   pound 

First  mix  the  oil  and  turpentine  and  then  add  the  oil  of  tar  and  sulphur. 
Your  druggist  may  not  have  train  oil,  as  it  is  often  hard  to  procure.  If  so, 
common    "black    oil"    or    crude    petroleum    will    do   just   as   well. 

All  mange  cures  should   bo  applied   the  same  as  directed  in  vising  mine. 

■"■""he  following,  as  a  dip,  was  recommended  by  a  friend,  who  used  it  in 
his  kem.ols.  The  only  objection  I  can  see  is  that  it  would  not  do  to  use 
in  cold  weather: 

"For  quick  cure  of  mange  use  1  quart  of  Standard  Oil  of  Tar  to  10 
quarts  of  water;  have  water  as  hot  as  possible  without  scalding  or  burning 
band,  mix  thoroughly,  place  liquid  In  small  narrow  tub,  one  that  will  just 
f»l  the  dog  if  possible;  place  dog  In  tub,  take  >.  cup  and  pour  the  liquid  all 
ovur  him,  Beginning  at  head,  just  below  ears;  saturate  dog  thoroughly, 
loosen  up  all  old  scabs,  applying  well  tbe  eure  to  affected  parts.    Take  stiff 


DISEASES  109 

brush,  wet  with  liquid,  brush  dog  thoroughly;  remove  dog  from  tub,  give 
him  a  bed  of  clean  straw  to  roll  in,  do  not  rinse  off  with  clean  water  or 
rub  skin  dry.  Do  not  allow  dog  to  roll  in  dirt  immediately  after  his 
wash,  as  he  will  if  not  chained  up  or  placed  in  a  room.  Rolling  in  sand 
after  a  wash  will  irritate  the  sores  and  make  the  cure  all  the  harder.  When 
about  dry.  the  sore  spots  may  be  touched  up  with  equal  parts  of  water 
and  Standard  Oil  of  Tar.  In  curing  mange,  the  bedding  must  be  changed 
every  day,  wash  all  woodwork  where  dog  rubs,  once  every  week  with  hot 
waicr  in   which  has  been  placed   Standard   Oil   of  Tar." 

There  is  no  use  in  taking  medicine  unless  you  follow  your  doctor's 
advice,  so  don't  expect  the  desired  result  unless  you  follow  directions,  as 
one  or  two  applications  will  not  effect  a  cure  in  a  case  Of  mange.  Mange 
can  be  cured,  no  matter  how  bad  a  case  it  appears  to  be,  if  you  go  at  it 
right  and  have  the  right  remedy,  in  fact,  it  is  one  of  the  easiest  to  cure  of 
all  troubles.  The  reason  why  so  many  people  dread  this  disease  is  be- 
cause of  their  failure  to  cure  what  they  wrongly  suppose  is  mange,  when 
it  perhaps  is  eczema,  which  is  a  much  longer  story,  but  can  also  be  cured 
and  the  treatment  of  which  is  given  under  that  heading.  Remember,  that* 
if  you  have  more  than  one  dog,  the  others  will  get  it  unless  the  afflicted 
one  is  removed  and  isolateu  in  time.  The  advantage  of  having  a  regular 
kennel  or  place  for  each  dog  to  sleep  is  manifest  in  treating  the  dog  for 
mange,  as  thus  you  can  disinfect  his  kennel  and  destroy  the  bedding,  which 
are  both  infected,  whereas,  if  your  dog  was  sleeping  any  place  he  wanted 
to  in  your  house,  this  would  be  a  very  difficult  matter,  and  while  you  cured 
him  he  could  again  contract  it  by  coming  in  contact  with  the  parasites  that 
had    not    been    destroyed. 

You  need  not  have  any  fear  of  con  i  racting  mange  from  your  dog; 
I  have  treated  many  cases  for  years  past  and  never  got  it — not  transmit- 
able  from  the  dog  to  man. 

There  are  several  skin  diseases  called  by  different  names,  or  desig- 
nated as  different  kinds  of  mange,  but  the  treatment  I  have  given  for 
mange,  and  the  one  for  eczema,  about  covers  the  whole  ground  of  skin 
trouble,  or,  my  remedy  will  cure  them  all,  excepting  that  in  some  of  them,  as 
in  eczema,  internal  remedies  must  also  be  used  at  the  same  time  to  work 
on  the  blood.  Eczema  is  fully  treated  elsewhere.  Carbolic  acid  is  used 
in  many  mange  cures,  a  dangerous  ingredient  unless  carefully  used  and 
in    small    quantities. 

My  long-time  friend,  Harry  \Y.  Lacy,  editor  of  American  Fancier  and 
Stock-keeper,   has   this   to   say   of   mange      read    it    also: 

"It  is  quite  true  that  eczema  or  red  mange  is  to  some  extent  con- 
tagious, but  we  have  not  found  it  to  be  so  to  any  extent  which  would  justify 
the  term  being  applied  to  it.  It  is  desirable,  always  to  keep  a  dog  affected 
with  skin  disease  away  from  other  dogs,  because  constant  contact  in  the 
kennel  or  at  play  is  liable  to  give  rise  to  an  exchange  of  skin  complaint. 
On  the  other  hand,  a  dog  with  distemper,  which  is  very  contagious,  is  made 
to  give  it  to  animals  which  never  come  mar  to  him,  and  a  dog  with 
fleas  will  furnish  a  supply  to  ail  his  fellows  in  the  neighborhood.  In  most 
cases  mange  is,  however,  not  due  to  contact  by  the  victim  with  another 
mangy  cur,  but  is  due  to  out-and-out  neglect.  Mange  is  never  known  in 
kennels  where  the  dogs  are  properly  looked  after;  it  is  a  cultivation  of  the 


HO  DISEASES 

back-yard,  and  thrives  best  upon  the  poor  chained-up  brute  that  is  more 
human  than  his  owner  who  keeps  him  chained  there'.  In  a  word,  filth  ia 
the  soil   on  which  alone  the  sarcoptic  parasite  can  thrive. 

"A  dog  with  ordinary  skin  irritation,  developing  into  redness  and 
rash,  has  acquired  that  in  one  of  two  ways.  Either  he  has  an  hereditary 
predisposition  to  skin  complaint  (and  here  let  it  be  said  that  this  heredi- 
tary predisposition  is  a  very  common  fact,  and  is  due  undoubtedly  in  a 
great  measure  to  the  in-breeding  which  has  been  carried  on  to  a  greater  or 
less  extent  in  all  breeds)  or  else  he  is  suffering  from  impurity  in  the  blood 
which  may  be  clue  to  over-feeding  or  liver  complaint  or  want  of  sufficient 
exercise  or  any  one  of  a  dozen  other  things.  If  the  former  be  the  case  it  is 
by  no  means  probable  that  a  cure  will  be  effected,  and  the  most  important 
thing  that  can  be  done  is  in  the  direction  of  preventing  the  disease  from 
being  handed  down  to  other  generations.  If  it  is  intended  to  breed  from 
the  dog  it  should  be  mated  with  the  newest  blood  possible — that  is  to  say 
with  an  animal  having  a  very  different  pedigree  from  its  own.  The  disease 
is  certain  to  reappear  even  after  the  dog  has  been  apparently  cured.  A 
^hange  of  diet  or  of  weather  will  always  be  liable  to  precipitate  a  fresh 
attack." 

The  following  treatise  on  mange  was  written  by  Dalziel,  and  to  it  your 
attention  is  called.     A  very  able  handling  of  the  subject: 

Sarcoptic  Mange — The  mite  producing  this  most  nearly  resembles  the 
itch-mite  of  man,  and  as  it  is  propagated  by  eggs,  and  transmitted  by 
contact,  direct  or  indirect,  there  seems  nothing  impossible  in  the  idea  of 
stamping  out  this  chief  "enemy  to  the  comfort  of  a  brave  spaniel,"  if  only 
we  could  get  every  clog  owner  to  be  careful  and  clean.  There  is  much  virtue 
in  an  "if;"  but  at  least  we  can  learn  from  the  facts  about  the  mange-mite 
that  we  need  not  harbor  it  in  our  own  kennels,  and  by  stamping  it  out 
there,  lessen  it  generally.  Dirt  unquestionably  harbors  and  encourages 
mange,  although  it  does  not  produce  it;  left  undisturbed  by  cleansing  pro- 
cesses,  the   pests   breed   and   multiply  with   great   rapidity. 

When  the  mite  reaches  the  dog,  it  burrows  into  the  skin;  the  pro- 
cess, and  also  a  poisonous  fluid  discharged  by  the  creature,  causes  intol- 
erable itching,  and  to  relieve  this  the  dog  scratches,  with  the  result  that 
the  skin  is  broken,  small  red  points  appear,  and  these  become  pustular 
and  discharge  a  fluid  which  dries  or  crusts  and  forms  a  scab;  the  hair 
falls  off.  The  multiplication  of  the  original  cause  of  the  evil  is  rapid,  and, 
left  unchecked,  the  whole  surface  of  the  body  soon  becomes  involved, 
while  the  poor  dog  is  an  object  of  pity,  and  from  want  of  rest  and  other 
causes  sinks  into  a  helpless  condition.  This  state  is  often  called  virulent 
or  scabby  mange,  and  presents  many  of  the  characteristics  of  Blotch.  The 
skin  is  harsh,  dry,  and  rough,  until  small  pimples  appear,  when  therefrom 
oozes  a  purulent  matter,  forming  scabs,  which  mat  the  hair  together,  and 
bring  it  off  in  patches  as  the  dog  rubs  or  scratches  himself.  The  back, 
breast,  and  inside  of  the  thighs  are  generally  the  first  places  attacked,  and 
every  crease  and  wrinkle  in  the  skin  becomes  inflamed  and  moist  with  the 
irritating  discharge.  If  the  disease  is  left  unchecked,  it  soon  extends  over 
the  whole  body,  reducing  the  dog  to  a  deplorable  condition,  disgusting  to 
all  who  see  him  and  intolerable  to  himself.  These  are  severe  and  extreme 
eases.     In  others  a  dry,  scurfy  mange  exists,  marked  by  little  red  spots, 


'    ~  DISEASES  111 

and  confined  to  the  joints  of  the  legs,  over  the  eyes,  the  flaps  of  the  ears, 
etc.:  and  this  may  exist  for  some  time  without  other  damage  than  causing 
the  dog  great  uneasiness  and  injury  to  his  appearance  by  partially  destroy- 
ing the  hair  and  robbing  it  of  its  natural  glossy  appearance. 

The  first  thing  to  be  done  with  a  mangy  dog  is  to  wash  him.  Let  him 
have  a  good  sousing  and  scrubbing  with  a  good  soap  and  water,  "hottish 
rather  but  not  so  boiling  as  to  turn  him  red;"  dry  well  with  a  soft  cloth, 
which  mast  immediately  be  boiled,  and  then  dress  him  with  one  or  the 
other  of  the  several  well  known  mange  cures.  Whatever  you  use,  see  that 
it  is  applied  thoroughly;  see  that  it  reaches  the  skin  where  the  mites  are, 
and  is  not  merely  left  on  the  hair.  Chronic  cases  of  mange  often  take  a 
month  or  two  to  cure.  Sulphur  is  given  as  an  internal  remedy  for  mange, 
but  it  is  not  of  any  use,  in  mange. 

Follicular  Mango  is  due  to  another  mite  (Demodex  folloculorum),  very 
different  in  appearance  from  the  other  (Saroptes),  which  are  short  and 
thick,  whereas  this,  the  Demodex,  is  elongated,  and  with  a  long,  obtuse 
tail.  These  parasites  differ  in  their  habits,  the  Demodex  living  in  the 
hair-follicles,  and  burrowing  deep  under  the  skin  in  the  sebaceous  gland 
that  supplies  the  unctous  matter  to  protect  the  skin  and  keep  it  soft. 
The  depth  to  which  the  Demodex  burrows  renders  Follicular  Mange  much 
lets  easy  of  transmission  between  dogs;  but  it  also  makes  a  cure  much 
more  difficult,  as  the  parasites  are  hard  to  reach.  This  mite  is  identical 
with  a  parasite  found  in  the  human  skin  causing  some  disfiguration  of 
the  face,  but  further  than  that  it  does  no  harm  until  transferred  to  the 
dog,  when  it  causes  a  most  repulsive  disease,  and  one  very  difficult  to 
•radicate. 

Some  few  yean  ago  Mr.  Wm.  Hunting,  F.R.S.V.S.,  in  conjunction  with 
Profes»or  Duguid,  made  a  series  of  investigations  and  experiments  in  eluci- 
dation of  this  disease,  and  the  following  description  of  symptoms  and 
the  diagnosis  are  from  an  article  by  the  former  gentleman,  which  appeared 
in  the  Veterinary  Journal,  and  afterward  in  pamphlet  form: 

"The  symptoms  of  the  disease  are  seldom  seen  in  the  first  stages;  they 
consist  merely  of  circumscribed  spots  from  which  the  hair  fallsy  and  upon 
which  are  noticeable  a  few  small  pimples.  These  patches  extend  rapidly,  and 
fresh  ones  appear  on  other  parts.  Any  portion  of  the  skin  may  be  affected, 
but  the  head,  legs,  belly,  and  sides,  are  usually  the  seat  of  the  disease. 
The  affected  places  are  almost  hairless,  and  what  hair  remains  is  easily 
pulled  out;  small  pimples  and  pustules  stud  the  surface,  the  latter  varying 
in  size  from  a  pin's  head  to  that  of  a  pea.  The  confluence  of  the  pustules, 
and  the  discharge  of  their  contents,  give  rise  to  scabs;  these  crack  and 
bleed,  and  so  produce  a  most  repulsive  appearance.  In  white-haired  dogs 
Ihe  skin  is  red;  in  all  it  is  extremely  hot,  and  emits  an  unpleasant  odor. 
The  irritation  does  not  excite  much  scratching,  but  the  dog  frequently 
shakes  himself.  More  pain  than  itshing  seems  to  accompany  the  disease. 
In  cases  where  the  whole  body  is  affected  loss  of  condition  is  most  marked; 
and  in  cold  weather  the  almost  total  loss  of  hair  may  cause  death,  if  the 
animal  be  not  kept  in  a  warm  place.  This  stage,  too,  is  always  accom- 
panied by  ravenous  appetite,  due,  probably,  to  the  rapid  loss  of  animal 
heat. 


112  DISEASES 

"Diagnosis. — In  white  clogs  the  color  of  the  skin  may  cause  the  disease 
to  be  mistaken  for  'Red  Mange'  or  'Eczema.'  The  circumscribed  spots  in 
the  first  stages  may  be  confounded  with  some  forms  of  Tinea,  and  the  loss 
of  hair  and  the  presence  of  scabs  seen  in  the  fully  developed  disease  may 
easily  be  mistaken  for  ordinary  scabies.  The  pustules,  the  heat  of  the  skin, 
and  the  comparatively  slight  itchiness  shown,  are,  however,  nearly  diagnos- 
tic. Positive  diagnosis  can  only  be  made  by  the  aid  of  the  microscope  and 
the  detection  of  the  parasite.  If  we  puncture  one  of  the  pustules,  and  mix 
its  contents  on  a  slide  with  a  little  water,  the  acari  are  easily  discovered. 
I  have  found  as  many  as  thirty  to  one  pustule.  Sometimes  we  may  detect 
them  on  the  root  of  a  hair  removed  from  an  affected  spot.  With  a  low 
power,  the  parasites  somewhat  resemble  sprats  or  minnows,  but  a  higher 
power  shows  them  to  consist  of  a  head  and  body,  which  latter  terminates 
in  a  long  and  obtusely  pointed  tail.  They  are  furnished  with  six  or  eight 
legs  situated  on  the  anterior  part  of  the  body,  three  or  four  on  each  side. 
The  head  consists  of  two  antennse  and  a  median  proboscis,  all  of  which 
are  capable  of  being  moved  forward  or  backward.  The  legs  consist  of 
three  segments.  The  movements  of  the  creatures  are  not  often  seen,  and 
are  very  slow.  The  parasite  measures  about  one-hundredth  of  an  inch  in 
length  by  one  five-hundredth  in  breadth." 

"In  regard  to  treatment,  Fleming,  in  Veterinary  Sanitary  Science,  says 
"The  situation  of  the  Demodex  renders  it  almost  inaccessible  to  parasi- 
tical remedies;  the  disease  it  engenders  is  therefore  looked  upon  as  ex- 
tremely troublesome,  and,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  almost  beyond  a  cure. 
Often,  when  it  is  believed  to  be  extinguished,  it  reappears  in  all  its  viru- 
lence in  one  or  two  months.  Nevertheless,  Zurn  asserts  that  he  has  fre- 
quently succeeded  with  an  ointment  composed  of  1  part  of  benzine  to  4 
parts  of  lard.  Zundel  states  that  the  balsam  of  Peru  has  often  yielded 
good  results  when  the  malady  has  not  been  of  too  long  duration;  he  has 
employed  it  dissolved  in  alcohol  (1  to  30)." 

Symptoms  of  Scaroptic  Mange. — In  pronounced  cases  this  disease  is 
easily  recognizable,  but  in  the  initial  stages,  when  the  hair  is  not  much 
lost  or  broken,  if  complicated  with  eczema — which  is  not  uncommon — 
diagnosis  is  more  difficult. 

The  first  symptom  is  that  of  great  irritation  of  the  affected  parts, 
especially  on  the  application  of  heat. 

The  symptoms  first  appear  in  the  form  of  small  red  spots,  which  may 
be  seen  on  the  head,  close  to  the  muzzle,  the  outside  of  the  roots  of  the 
ears,  round  the  eyes  and  neck,  the  bottom  part  of  the  chest,  the  elbows, 
the  soft  skin  of  the  stomach,  behind  the  thighs  and  the  feet. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  may  appear  on  any  part  of  the  body.  The 
small  red  spots  resemble  flea  bites  on  the  human  skin.  These  red  spots 
are  more  noticeable  when  situated  on  the  stomach  or  inside  the  thighs. 

Little  blisters  appear  in  place  of  the  red  spots,  and  if  they  are  in 
large  numbers  and  burst  open  sores  appear. 

Injury  will  result  from  an  inoculation  of  the  skin  with  the  contents 
of  the  blisters,  which  often  occurs  as  a  result  of  scratching  or  rubbing. 

Doss  of  hair  will  follow  this,  and  is  caused  partly  by  the  scratching 
and  partly  by  the  scaling  of  the  crusts  of  the  skin  caused  by  the  small 
blisters  and  pimples. 


DISEASES  '    "  113 

Te  skin  then  becomes  thickened  and  hardened.  In  neglected  cases  the 
general  health  is  very  much  affected,  as  the  animal  gets  little  rest,  and 
in  weakly  subjects  generally  results  fatally. 

Scaroptic  Mange  is  very  readily  communicated  to  the  human  subject, 
and  is  the  cause  in  most  cases  of  what  is  termed  "Scabbies,"  and  is  far  more 
common  than  is  generally  supposed.  But  Scaroptic  Mange  is  comparatively 
easy  to  cure  if  taken  in  hand  rightly.  It  is  a  waste  of  time  to  simply 
apply  a  mange  cure  to  the  affected  parts.  To  complete  a  cure  you  must 
treat  your  dog  internally  as  well  as  externally  or  you  will  never  have  a 
perfect  cure. 

Here  is  where  I  should  try  Eberhart's  Skin  Remedy — and  for  the 
blood,  use  internally,  the  White  Sulphur,  as  advised  for  Eczema.  (See 
Eczema). 

Mouth,  Canker  of  the — This  is  generally  the  result  of  dainty  feeding 
and  lack  of  exercise,  but  in  old  dogs  it  may  come  from  failing  teeth  and  want 
of  masticating  power.  Either  or  both  of  these  causes  lead  to  disordered 
stomach  and  foul  breath;  a  deposit  of  tartar  takes  place,  the  gums  and 
lips  becoming  red,  inflamed,  and  spongy,  and  after  a  time  a  fetid  discharge 
from  the  mouth,  and  often  accompanied  with  bleeding.  Old  animals  are 
most  subject  to  this  trouble,  and  by  examining  you  will  probably  find  some 
decayed  teeth,  the  gums  being  so  tender  that  in  attempting  to  eat,  the 
dog  suffers  great  pain,  which  he  will  show  by  his  trying  to  chew  the  food 
for  a  minute,  roll  it  about  in  his  mouth  and  then  drop  it. 

To  cure  the  disease,  remove  the  cause.  If  you  have  been  cramming  the 
dog  with  delicacies,  return  to  a  sensible  way  of  feeding  and  give  proper 
exercise.  Examine  his  mouth  carefully  for  decayed  teeth,  and,  if  found, 
remove  them  and  the  rotten  stumps  with  a  pair  of  suitable  forceps.  This 
is  not  so  difficult  and  you  can  do  it  by  having  some  one  hold  the  dog's 
head  firmly,  and  can  be  done  more  easily  than  may  be  supposed,  a  very 
little  practice  making  any  one  efficient.  While  his  mouth  is  in  such  a 
tender  state  he  must  have  food  that  requires  no  chewing,  as  well  as  to 
keep  correct  his  disordered  stomach.  A  vegetable  diet  is  now  the  thing. 
Give  him  quite  a  brisk  dose  of  the  following  pills: 

Podophyllin     6   grains 

Compound  extract  of  colocynth 30   grains 

Powdered    rhubarb    48  grains 

Extract  of  henbane   36   grains 

Mix,  and  divide  into  twenty-four  pills.     Give  for  grown   dogs  from 
two  to  four  pills,  according  to  size. 

After  a  dose  of  this,  then  use  the  following: 

Extract  of  gentian    1   dram        i. 

Powdered    rhubarb    3  6   grains 

Carbonate  of  soda 12   grains 

Gum  acacia  sufficient  to  make  into  twelve  10-grain  pills. 


114  DISEASES 

Very  small   toy  dogs  should   have  half  a  pill.      Give  these   twice   a 
day  until  all  the  symptoms  have  disappeared. 

A  most  excellent  wash  for  the  mouth  in  order  to  remove  the  unpleasant 
smell,  is  a  solution  6f  chlorinated  soda,  diluted  with  twenty-four  to  thirty 
times  its  volume  of  water.  Wash  out  the  mouth  freely  with  this  several 
times  a  day. 

The  following  will  harden  the  gums  and  assist  in  bringing  them  to  a 
healthy  state:  Take  powdered  alum,  %  ounce;  simple  tincture  of  myrrh,  1 
ounce;  dissolve  the  alum  in  a  pint  of  water  and  add  the  tincture  of  myrrh. 

The  ulcers  that  occur  upon  the  gums  should  be  touched  with  a  10  per 
cent  solution  of  nitrate  of  silver. 

Milk-Glands,  Inflammation  of  the. — See  Mammltis. 

Meningitis. — See  Brain,  Inflammation  of  the. 

Milk,  Absence  of. — This  trouble  Is  quite  too  often  met  with  in  bitches, 
I  regret  to  say.  Usually  the  result  of  weakness,  obesity,  or  disease  of  the 
mammary  glands.  It  sometimes  is  luckily  only  temporary,  and  the  secre- 
tion can  be  restored  with  friction  to  the  glands  with  the  hand.  The  fol- 
lowing can  be  given  to  weakly  bitches: 

Tincture  cinchonae  co 1  ounce 

Liquor   cinchonae    V2  dram 

Spirits-  of  ammonia  aromatic   %  ounce 

Water,   to   make    6  ounces 

Dose,  a  teaspoonful  to  a  tablespoonful  three  times  daily,  according 
to  size  of  bitch. 

Maw-AVorms. — See  Worms. 

Mammltis,  (Inflammation  of  the  Milk-Glands)  frequently  occurs.  Caus- 
es are,  retention  of  milk,  the  result  of  taking  away  the  puppies  immediately 
after  born,  or  too  early,  or  from  their  death,  or  cold  or  injuries.  Symp- 
toms are  a  redness  and  tenderness  of  the  parts,  the  milk  is  curdled,  and 
often  puss  or  blood  accompanies  it,  the  former  if  abscesses  have  formed. 
Very  highly  important  that  such  cases  should  be  attended  to  at  once.  As 
quick  as  first  symptoms  are  noticed  foment  the  parts  with  warm  water 
during  the  day,  being  careful  to  dry  well  afterward.  If  caused  by  the 
retention  of  milk  by  the  bitch  having  lost  her  puppies,  or  they  were  taken 
away  from  her,  the  milk  must  be  drawn  away  frequently  by  the  hands.  ' 
Where  possible,  and  the  bitch  will  permit,  a  puppy  should  be  given  her. 
Give  her  one  to  two  drams  of  epsom  salts  with  from  ten  to  twenty  grains 
of  bicarbonate  of  soda  twice  daily  in  water,  until  the  bowels  are  well 
relaxed.  By  adopting  this  treatment  in  the  early  stages  the  inflammation 
will  usually  subside  and  the  gland  regain  its  normal  condition.  Pus  or 
matter  will  accumulate  in  protracted  cases,  and  abscesses  form.    The  latter 


DISEASES  '  115 

must  be  eradiated  by  lancing,  and  boracic  acid  lotion  or  ointment  applied 
to  the  part  nigbt  and  morning,  and  to  prevent  her  from  licking  it  she 
should  have  a  muzzle  with  a  piece  of  canvas  sewn  over  the  front.  Where 
abscesses  have  formed,  patches  of  the  gland  will  generally  become  obliter- 
ated, and  of  no  further  use.  Mammitis  does  sometimes  assume  a  chronic 
form,  the  glands  become  enlarged  and  indurated. 

Milk  Fever  (Parturient  Apoplexy)  is  uncommon  in  the  bitch.  There  is 
clanger  of  causing  it  by  robbing  her  of  all  her  puppies,  especially  if  she  has 
plenty  of  milk,  in  a  case  of  where  she  has  got  out  on  you  and  bred  by  mistake 
to  some  common  dog.  Drown  all  but  one  puppy  as  soon  as  born,  if  you  don't 
want  to  raise  them,  but  leave  one  to  nurse  for  a  week  or  so. 

The  Symptoms  are  apparent  weakness,  staggering,  quick  hard  breath- 
ing, hot  dry  nose  and  tongue,  the  tongue  furred;  the  milk  is  suppressed, 
and  the    bitch  shows  extreme  thirst. 

Treatment — Apply  ice  to  the  head,  if  possible;  if  not,  then  cold  water 
often  relieves  the  bowels  by  clysters.  Keep  her  quiet  and  as  little  disturbed 
as  can  be,  a  soft  bed  provided  so  the  head  will  be  somewhat  elevated.  This 
is  very  important.  Also  give  Glover's  and  Clayton's  Distemper  Cure  every 
two  or  three  hours  in  teaspoonful  doses  for  ordinary  sized  dogs,  for  a  day 
■or  two,  until  she  is  better,  which  will  allay  the  fever.  The  bitch  should 
be  milked  two  or  three  times  a  day.  If  a  caked  breast  appears  treat  this 
as  prescribed  under  that  heading.  In  Milk  Fever  when  the  bitch  is  uncon- 
scious, nourishment,  such  as  brandy  and  milk,  can  be  given  her  rectum. 
The  bladder  must  be  emptied  by  means  of  the  catheter. 

Navel  Hernia,  or  Rupture. — An  enlargement  of  the  navel,  often  met 
with  in  puppies,  and  may  be  simply  an  expansion  of  the  same,  or  cicatrice. 
Navel  hernia  is  the  protrusion  of  a  portion  of  the  intestine — the  membra- 
neous covering  of  the  bowels.  It  may  be  caused  by  extra  strain  at  birth 
on  the  umbilical  cord,  or  the  tongue  of  the  mother  may  extend  the  wound. 
It  is  a  soft,  movable  tumor  over  the  navel,  varying  in  size,  and  most  prom- 
inent when  the  stomach  and  bowels  are  full.  I  have  seen  it  occur  in  pup- 
pies, but  so  slight  that  I  did  not  do  anything  for  them,  it  doing  no  harm, 
and  only  leaving  a  small  lump  that  was  never  noticed  as  they  grew  up, 
the  hair  on  the  belly  hiding  it.  In  treating  puppies  for  it,  wait  till  they  are 
weaned  and  separated  from  their  mother,  or  she  will,  with  her  tongue, 
remove  or  displace  the  application.  Now  take  the  puppy  in  the  morn- 
ing, before  his  breakfast,  when  bowels  are  empty,  lay  him  on  his  back  on 
your  lap,  and  place  over  the  enlargement  a  pad  of  vulcanized  India  rubber  or 
cork,  tapered,  the  smaller  end  being  applied  on  the  tumor  after  it  has  been 
pressed  in,  and  the  pad  secured  by  strips  of  white  leather  smeared  with 
warm  pitch  plaster,  well  stuck  to  the  belly  so  pup  can  not  scratch  it  off  with 
its  feet.     A  cure  can  be  effected  in  a  few  weeks  if  the  pad  is  kept  in  place. 

Here  is  a  case  that  was  prescribed  for  by  Dent: 

"My  pointer  puppy,  ten  weeks  old,  strong  and  healthy,  has  a  rupture 
right  under  its  belly,  near  the  ribs  and  about  the  size  of  a  very  large  pea. 


116  '  DISEASES 

Will  it  have  any  bad  effect  on  the  dog  after  being  cured?  Please  prescribe. 
Ans. — These  navel  ruptures  frequently  disappear  with  age  and  seldom 
cause  any  inconvenience.  If  you  want  to  operate  on  the  rupture,  lay  the 
dog  on  his  back,  pinch  the  skin  up  over  the  opening  in  the  walls  of  the 
abdomen  and  pass  two  pins  through  at  right  angles  to  each  other,  being 
careful  not  to  puncture  the  intestines;  then  tie  a  silk  cord  around  the  skin 
between  the  body  and  the  pins  and  allow  it  to  stay  there  until  it  sloughs 
off." 

Nephritis. — See  Kidneys,  Inflammation   of. 

Obesity. — See  Fatness,  Excessive. 

Ostitis  (Inflammation  of  the  Bone) This  is  generally  due  to  violence, 

blows,  or  to  constitutional  disturbance,  like  rheumatism  or  scrofula.  Symp- 
toms are  pain,  heat  and  swelling  of  the  skin  at  the  affected  part,  also  lame- 
ness. Very  essential  in  such  cases  is  rest,  combined  with  hot  fomenta- 
tions to  the  part  and  a  dose  of  aperient  medicine;  when  due  to  rheumatism, 
the  systemic  treatment  recommended  under  Rheumatism,  should. be  adopt- 
ed; and  should  there  be  an  enlargement  left  after  the  acute  inflammation 
has  subsided,  the  part  should  be  painted  daily  with  tincture  of  iodine,  unless 
soreness  is  produced,  when  this  treatment  should  cease  for  a  day  or  two. 

Ozoena. — This  complaint  shows  itself  by  a  discharge  from  both  nos- 
trils. The  causes  are  diseased  teeth,  protracted  catarrh,  causing  chronic 
inflammation  of  the  lining  membrane  of  the  nose,  polypi,  or  inflammation 
of  the  sinuses  of  the  nose,  due  to  the  presence  of  foreign  matter  in  that 
organ.  Where  the  disease  is  due  to  decayed  teeth,  the  latter  should  be 
extracted;  or  to  polypi,  these  should  be  removed.  The  nostrils  should  be 
syringed  night  and  morning  with  a  saturated  solution  of  boracic  acid;  or 
the  tincture  of  hydrastis  is  often  useful — 1  part  of  tincture  to  equal  parts 
of  water.     Exercise  and  fresh  air  are  very  necessary  to  recovery. 

Poisoning. — A  dastardly  act  is  to  poison  a  dog,  and  no  punishment  is 
too  severe  to  inflict  on  the  cowardly  cur  who  does  it.  If  I  could  have  my 
way  about  it,  the  cur  that  poisons  a  dog  would  hang  by  the  neck  till  he 
was  dead,  a  proper  punishment,  properly  fitting  the  crime.  If  you  are  so 
unfortunate  as  to  have  your  dog  poisoned,  keep  your  eye  open  on  your 
neighbors — who  perhaps  are  unfortunately  such  degenerates  that  they 
do  not  like  dogs.  Bide  your  time,  but  never  give  up  trying  to  land  the 
cur  who  poisoned  your  dog,  and  then,  if  you  can  not  have  positive  proof 
enough  to  punish  him  or  her  legally,  try  some  other  plan  quietly,  and 
never  give  up  until  you  have  in  some  way  punished  the  one  who  killed 
your  dog. 

I  am  devoting  considerable  space  to  this  subjett,  as  it  is  important, 
and  advise  that  you  study  this  article  well,  so  that  if  you  are  so  unfortunate 
as  to  ever  have  a  dog  poisoned,  you  may  know  what  to  do  promptly,  and 
perhaps  save  your  dog. 

It  may  be  of  service  to  some  readers  io  briefly  refer  to  a   few  of  the 


DISEASES  117, 

commoner  and  more  popularly  known  poisons  from  which  are  dogs  are 
most  likely  to  suffer;  and  I  think  the  following  will  cover  the  majority 
of  cases:  Arsenic,  cantharides,  carbolic  acid,  corrosive  sublimate,  phosphor- 
ous and  strychnine. 

As.  a  general  rule  for  distinguishing  between  the  evidence  of  poisoning 
and  the  symptoms  of  disease,  the  suddenness  of  the  attack  must  weigh 
largely;  while  by  tracing  where  the  dog  has  been,  and  what  he  has  or  is 
likely  to  have  picked  up,  a  pretty  accurate  conclusion  may  be  arrived  at. 

The  first  step  to  be  taken  in  most  cases  is  to  freely  empty  the  stomach 
by  means  of  emetics  such  as  tartar  emetic,  sulphate  of  zinc,  ipecacuanha 
wine,  one  of  the  most  useful  and  least  dangerous  to  use.  The  dose  is  from 
3  drams  to  8  drams  in  a  little  warm  water.  If  none  of  these  are  at  hand, 
by  drenching  with  lukewarm  water,  and  afterwards  giving  the  antidotes 
indicated  if  procurable. 

If  the  dog  suffer  much  pain,  a  dose  of  opium  or  laudanum  every  three 
or  four  hours.  Where  gieat  depression  and  weakness  follow,  stimulants, 
as  ether,  wine,  or  brandy,  should  be  given  in  small  quantities  at  frequent 
intervals. 

Arsenic  is  used  to  poison  rats,  mice  and  other  vermin;  in  this  way  it  is 
frequently  met  with  in  and  about  country  houses. 

Symptoms:  Great  heat  and  evident  pain  in  the  stomach  and  bowels, 
sometimes  accompanied  with  swelling — the  belly  being  very  tender  to  the 
touch — great  thirst,  frequent  vomiting  and  retching,  more  or  less  discharge 
of  a  frothy  saliva,  and  frequent  evacuations  of  fluid,  dark  colored  matter, 
often  marked  with  blood.  The  animal  soon  loses  muscular  power  to  a  great 
extent,  showing  an  indisposition  to  move;  the  tongue,  lips,  etc.,  are  red  and 
swollen,  and  the  breathing  is  more  and  more  labored  and  painful. 

Antidotes:  Ferrugo  or  hydrated  sesquioxide  of  iron,  12  parts  of  which 
combine  with  1  part  of  arsenic,  froming  an  insoluble  compound;  also  light 
magnesia,  which  will  remove  l-25th  its  weight  of  arsenic  from  its  solution 
in  water. 

Cantharides  (Spanish  Fly). — This  is  given  by  ignorant  men  for  pur- 
poses which  are  defeated;  but,  being  an  acrid,  irritant  poison,  it  produces 
serious  results,  frequently  causing  inflammation  of  the  urinary  organs. 

Symptoms:  Violent  thirst,  copious  discharge  of  bloody  mucous  from 
the  stomach,  mixed  with  which  may  be  seen  the  shiny  green  particles  of 
the  "flies;"  there  are  great  pains  in  the  loins  and  bowels,  swelling  and 
inflammation  of  the  genital  organs,  and  bloody  stools  and  urine. 

Antidotes:  An  emetic  should  at  once  be  resorted  to,  the  dog  should 
afterwards  be  drenched  with  demulcents,  and  a  dose  of  opium  given  every 
three  or  four  hours. 

Carbolic  Acid — This  produces  baneful  effects,  even  by  absorption 
through  the  pores  of  the  skin,  when  too  freely  used.  It  causes  great  pros- 
tration, with   trembling  of  the  whole  frame. 

Symptoms:  Extraordinary  depression  of  the  vital  powers,  general 
shivering  and  almost  constant  trembling  of  the  limbs,  and  a  palsied  motion 
of  the  head.     Bleeding  at  the  nose  is  a  frequent  symptom,  and  the  dis- 


118  DISEASES 

charges   from   the  bowels  are  also   often   stained   with   blood;    the   counte- 
nance of  the  sufferer  is  expressive  of  a  most  helpless  and  painful  state. 

Antidoes:  The  proper  treatment  consists  in  placing  the  dog  in  a  warm 
bath,  using  friction  the  while,  and  administering  such  stimulants  as  am- 
monia, ether,  brandy,  etc.,  in  water  or  gruel. 

Corrosive  Sublimate  is  used  for  a  variety  of  purposes  about  farms,  al- 
though for  most  of  these  it  must  be  admitted  a  non-poisonous  article  would 
answer  as  well  or  better.  Corrosive  sublimate,  phosphorous  and  strych- 
nine each  enters  into  the  composition  of  paste  and  powders  largely  sold  for 
the  destruction  of  vermin,  and  it  is  when  so  used,  being  placed  on  bread 
and  butter,  bits  of  meat,  etc.,  that  they  are  most  likely  to  be  picked  up  by 
the  dog. 

Symptoms:  Violent  vomiting  and  purging  of  stringy  and  offensive 
matter,  the  belly  is  distended  and  painful  to  the  touch;  the  urine  suppress- 
ed, cramp  and  twitches  are  noticeable  in  the  limbs,  and  frequently  paraly- 
sis ensues. 

Antidotes:  Tartar  emetic  as  an  emetic;  white  of  egg,  followed  imme- 
diately by  infusion  of  galls;  milk  or  gluten  of  wheat.  Of  the  chemical  anti- 
dotes, the  albumen  of  eggs  is  by  far  the  best;  the  white  of  one  egg  is 
sufficient  to  neutralize  or  render  insoluble  4  gr.  of  solid  bichloride  of  mer- 
cury. 

Phosphorous. — Antidoes:  Calcined  magnesia,  with  diluents  and  de- 
mulcents given  in  quantity. 

Strichnine. — Symptoms:  Acute  pain,  causing  the  dog  to  utter  sharp 
cries;  frequent  twitchings  and  jerkings  of  the  head  and  limbs,  the  fore  and 
hind  legs  are  drawn  towards  each  other,  the  back  is  arched;  the  fits  of 
cramp  and  twitching  are  intermittent,  but  are  readily  brought  on  by  a 
touch  or  a  sudden  noise.  Foaming  at  the  mouth  is  another  and  frequent 
symptom. 

Antidotes:  Give  an  emetic  at  once,  mustard  and  hot  water,  coffee,  salt 
and  hot  water;  give  lard,  or  any  fat,  in  considerable  quantities. 

"The  following  has  saved  many  valuable  dogs  poisoned  by  strychnine 
and  will  save  any  dog  if  breath  is  Left  in  body.  As  soon  as  the  owner  is 
convinced  that  the  dog  has  strychnine,  or  dog  button  (nux  vomica),  symp- 
toms of  which  are  readily  detected  by  spasms  and  rigid  spine,  give  fifteen 
drops  of  homeopathy  tincture  of  belladonia  (green  root).  Give  same  dose 
after  each  spasm.  If  dog  is  too  far  gone  to  swallow,  inject  thirty  drops  in 
rectum.  The  second  dose  can  be  given  by  mouth.  It  is  seldom  the  third 
dose  is  necessary."  This  I  copied  from  letter  sent  to  the  American  Field 
by  some  sportsman  who  had  been  out  hunting  with  his  pointer.  He  fur- 
ther wrote:  "When  I  reached  him  he  had  had  some  twelve  spasms  and  was 
rigid,  tongue  cold,  eyes  turned,  etc.  Three  doses  brought  the  dog  out  and 
some  thirty  quail  were  killed  over  him  the  next  day." 

Here  are  also  other  antidotes  that  are  used  in  cases  of  poisoning: 

Strychnine  is  most  commonly  used  to  poison  dogs,  and  if  noticed  when 
taken  sick,  or  even  after  violent  convulsions  have  set  in,  they  can  almost 


diseases  119 

Invariably  be  saved  by  injecting  under  the  skin,  with  hypodermic  syringe, 
LO  grain  doses  of  chloral  (dissolved  in  water)  every  15  or  20  minutes  until 
50  or  60  grains  are  used. 

If  convulsions  quiet  down  and  dog  seems  better,  it  might  be  safe  to  stop 
when  30  or  40  grains  have  been  given. 

It  will  pay  any  one  owning  a  number  of  dogs  to  keep  a  hypodermic 
syringe. 

Dent  says:  The  best  antidote  for  strychnine  poisoning  is  chloral  hy- 
drate, size  of  dose  depends  upon  the  condition  of  the  dog;  in  health  the 
done  is  5  to  20  grains. 

Dog  poisoning  is  so  prevalent  in  many  parts  of  the  country  just  now, 
it  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  reproduce  part  of  Mr.  A.  J.  Sewell's  (the 
noted  English  veterinarian)  article  on  this  subject  in  the  Kennel  Gazette 
(Eng.),  so  that  dog  owners  may  be  prepared  for  such  emergencies: 

"In  all  cases  of  poisoning,  more  especially  when  due  to  strychnia, 
prompt  action  is  required  and  means  should  be  at  once  taken  to  make  the 
dog  disgorge  what  has  been  swallowed.  An  emetic  that  will  act  well  and 
quickly  must  be  at  once  administered;  for  this  there  is  nothing  better  than 
a  dose  of  apomorphia.  This  medicine  acts  in  two  ways;  it  is  the  quickest 
and  surest  emetic,  and  besides  it  relieves  the  spasms.  The  dose  is  the 
eighth  of  a  grain  for  small  dogs,  and  about  the  quarter  of  a  grain  for 
the  large  ones,  given  in  a  teaspoonful  of  water;  but  the  best  way  of  admin- 
istering it  is  by  injecting  it  under  the  skin  with  a  hypodermic  syringe — 
than  from  three  to  eight  minims  of  the  one  in  fifty  s'olutions  is  to  be  given. 

"I  always  advise  persons  who  keep  a  number  of  valuable  dogs  to  have 
a  solution  of  apomorphia  by  them  ready  for  emergency,  for  while  it  is  being 
obtained  the  patient  may  die,  and  if  huntsmen  would  always  carry  a  small 
bottle  of  solution  with  them,  many  a  valuable  hound's  life  might  be  saved. 
When  this  medicine  is  not  at  hand  some  other  emetic  must  be  given.  Ordi- 
nary table  salt  can  be  always  quickly  procured,  and  from  one  teaspoonful  to 
a  tablespoonful,  according  to  the  size  of  the  dog,  should  be  given  in  warm 
water.  If  the  dose  does  not  act  freely,  repeat  it  in  a  few  minutes,  or,  instead, 
give  from  five  to  twenty  grains  of  powdered  ipecacuanha,  or  from  one  to 
three  grains  of  tar  emetic.  Either  of  these  may  be  shaken  dry  on  the 
tongue;  the  dog  must  be  made  to  vomit  somehow,  but  anything  like  salt 
requiring  a  quantity  of  water  is  often  difficult  to  administer,  as  the  dog's 
mouth  is  often  tightly  clenched  and  trying  to  open  it  induces  a  paroxysm, 
during  which  time  it  is  impossible  to  give  anything  by  the  mouth,  and  here 
the  advantage  of  the  subcutaneous  injection  of  apomorphia  comes  in.  This 
may  also  be  repeated  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour  if  the  vomiting  has  not  been 
free.  Besides  the  emetic  some  medicine  is  necessary  to  relieve  the  spasm. 
Fro  this  there  is  nothing  better  than  chloral  and  bromide  of  potassium. 
From  fifteen  grains  to  two  scruples  of  each  may  be  given  in  from  one  to 
three  tablespoonfuls  of  water  if  the  dog  can  be  made  to  swallow,  and  half 
the  quantity  of  each  may  be  given  again  in  twenty  or  thirty  minutes  and 
repeated,  if  necessary,  in  half  an  hour.  When  the  dog  is  unable  to  swal- 
low, from  three  to  ten  minims  of  nitrite  of  amyl  held  to  the  nose  on  a 
pocket  handkerchief  is  useful.  This  may  be  repeated  In  a  quarter  of  an 
hour,  or  chloroform  may  be  given.  Also  inject  into  the  rectum  from  one- 
half  to  two  drams  of  laudanum,  in  from  on  to  four  tablespoonfuls  of  water, 


!20  DISEASES 

which  repeat  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  again  in  another  fifteen  ininuteS 
if  the  paroxysms  continue.  After,  the  severe  symptoms  have  passed  and 
the  dog  is  weak  and  prostrate,  from  one-half  to  two  teaspoonfuls  of  brandy 
added  to  some  milk  may  be  administered  and  repeated  every  hour  for  a 

time.)' 

Ground  Glass. — The  symptoms  are  bloody  passages,  great  pain  and 
distress,  and  vomiting  of  blood.  There  is  no  cure  for  this,  and  it  is  merciful 
to  destroy  the  poor  animal  at  once,  ending  his  suffering  by  chloroforming. 

I  now  conclude  this  article  by  giving  one  that  was  published  in  the 
American  Stock-Keeper: 

"Phosphorous  is  a  dangerous  poison,  and  will  be  got  from  rat-paste 
which  is  left  lying  about,  spread  on  bread  and  butter.  For  this  give  an 
emetic,  followed  by  a  draught  of  Magnesia  and  water.  Afterwards  milk 
and  other  demulcents,  with  a  few  drops  of  laudanum  to  allay  pain.  Mer- 
cury may  be  taken  in  several  forms — either  as  Calomel,  'White  Precipi- 
tate,' or  'Corrosive  Sublimate' — all  of  which  are  accessible  to  dogs  at  var- 
ious times.  Give  large  draughts  of  white  of  egg  beaten  up  with  water;  an 
emetic  first.  Then  diet  on  milk  and  broth.  If  violent  purging,  give  a  little 
laudanum.  Sulphate  of  copper  is  in  common  use  about  farms,  and  so  is 
dangerous  to  dogs,  who  may  pick  up  and  devour  dead  birds  in  a  corn  field 
in  which  the  seed  has  been  dressed  with  this  poison.  Its  antidotes  are 
demulcents  (after  the  usual  emetic),  such  as  white  of  egg  and  milk,  and  a 
little  laudanum  later.  It  "will  be  seen  from  the  forecoming  that  the  treat- 
ment for  all  mineral  poisons  is  very  similar  all  round. 

"Now,  as  to  vegetable  poisons,  or,  to  be  more  precise,  organic  poisons 
(minerals  being  inorganic).  The  chief  of  these,  as  far  as  they  affect  dogs 
and  their  owners,  are  Aconite,  Belladonna,  Digitalis  ('Fox-glove'),  Opium 
Strychnine  and  their  various  compounds  or  derivatives.  First,  then, 
Aconite,  which  is  often  given  as  a  medicine,  and  of  which  it  is  easy 
to  give  an  overdose.  Give  an  emetic,  and  then  proceed  with  stimulants — - 
brandy,  etc.  Keep  warm,  and  try  artificial  respiration  if  need  be.  For  Bel- 
ladonna similar  treatment.  Good  hot  drinks  of  stimulants.  Foxglove 
(Digitalis)- — often  prescribed  for  heart  affections  in  dogs,  as  well  as  in  men 
- — for  this,  after  an  emetic,  give  warm  tea,  followed  by  stimulants.  Opium, 
the  active  principle  of  which  is  morphia,  needs  a  good  emetic,  followed  by 
a  draught  of  brandy  and  water;  every  effort  must  be  made  to  subdue  drow- 
siness by  brisk  exercise  until  the  effect  has  worn  off.  Lastly,  Strychnine — - 
deadliest  of  poisons — a  component  of  all  vermin  killers — easily  recognized 
by  its  effect  on  the  muscles.  Give  an  emetic,  followed  by  doses  of  Potas- 
sium Bromide  every  twenty  minutes,  and  later  a  dose  of  Castor  Oil.  Strych- 
nine is,  as  we  have  stated  earlier,  the  most  active  principle  of  Nux  Vomica." 

Here  is  also,  some  good  advice  on  strychnine  poisoning  that  I  found 
some  place,  and  worth  including: 

"Strychnine  poisoning,  unfortunately,  is  so  rapidly  fatal  that  the  dog 
is  usually  found  dead  or  dying.  If  there  has  been  immediate  vomiting  or 
only  a  small  dose  swallowed,  the  chances  of  recovery  are  good  when  the 
proper  means  are  available.  If  vomiting  has  not  occurred,  produce  it  by 
giving  a  warm  solution  of  common  salt  (a  tablespoonful  to  the  pint)  in  large 


DISEASES  121 

doses  until  the  stomach  is  well  emptied.  After  this  the  most  important 
object  is  to  produce  stupor,  and  morphine,  hypodermically  administered,  as 
well  as  being  a  good  emetic,  is  a  safe  narcotic  in  the  dog.  In  dogs  over 
six  months  old  one-fourth  grain  can  be  given  safely  for  every  ten  pounds  of 
live  weight.  This  should  be  followed  by  chloroform  inhalation  adminis- 
tered lightly  and  kept  up  until  the  convulsions  become  less  pronounced. 
Chloral  hydrate  is  probably  the  best  antidote  in  cases  where  it  cannot  be 
given  by  the  mouth  owing  to  spasm  of  the  cheek  muscles.  It  should  be 
given  in  from  ten  to  thirty  grain  doses,  dissolved  in  an  ounce  of  warm 
water,  injected  gently  in  the  rectum.  The  dose  can  be  repeated  if  con- 
sidered necessary  every  hour.  The  animal  suould  be  kept  as  quiet  as  pos- 
sible, harsh  sounds,  bright  lights  or  unnecessary  handling  tending  to  increase 
the  severity  of  the  convulsions." 

Parasites,  External — The  number  and  variety  of  parasites  that  make 
one  part  or  another  of  the  dog  their  habitat  is  very  great.  These  are  di- 
vided into  external  and  internal;  in  the  former  two  distinct  mites,  produc- 
ing two  very  distinct  forms  of  the  mange,  have  already  been  referred  to, 
and  the  internal  parasites  are  treated  under  Worms. 

There  is  no  dog  owner  of  much  experience  who  is  not  aware  that  great 
care  and  cleanliness  are  needed  to  prevent  the  introduction  of  these  un- 
welcome visitors,  or  who  has  not  had  to  pay  smartly  for  their  extermina- 
tion, if  his  kennels  have  been  neglected.  The  parasites  to  which  I  par- 
ticularly wish  to  direct  attention  are  three  in  number — the  louse,  the  flea 
and  the  tick — which  now  follow  in  order  named  as   to  treating. 

Dog  Louse. — These  resemble  that  of  a  man,  only  larger  in  size,  and  can 
not  live  on  a  human  being.  It  causes  great  irritation,  the  dog  scratching 
and  worrying  himself  constantly.  They  live  on  all,  or  any  part  of  the 
body,  but  most  abundant  about  the  head  and  face,  the  eyes,  roots  of  ears, 
and  along  the  top  of  the  back.  By  closely  examining  the  dog's  skin,  red 
streaks  and  dots  of  blood  will  be  seen  where  the  louse  has  been  feeding. 

One  species  is  described  in  Prof.  Neumann's  "Parasites,"  translated 
by  Prof.  Fleming: 

"The  head  is  short  and  almost  as  wide  as  long;  it  is  salient  in  the 
thorax  to  which  it  is  exactly  applied;  the  third  and  fourth  articles  of  the 
antennae  are  alike.  The  abdomen  is  very  developed  in  the  female,  and  is 
a  long  oval  in  shape;  it  has  nine  rounded  segments,  which  are  often  salient 
at  the  sides;  stigmates  distinct  and  marginal;  the  first  seven  segments 
have  two  rows  of  short  bristles.  The  general  tint  is  yellowish-white,  the 
head  and  thorax  being  a  little  darker.  T^he  female  is  2mm.  long,  and  the 
male  l-15mm."  This  louse  is  oftener  found  about  the  throat  and  back  of 
the  ears,  but  extends  to  all  parts  of  the  body. 

The  other  louse  of  the  dog  is  Trichodectes  latus,  of  which  this  is 
Neumann's  description:  "The  head  is  sub-quadrangular  and  much  wider 
than  it  is  long,  being  truncated  in  front;  the  antennas  are  hairy  and  dif- 
ferent in  the  two  sexes,  the  first  article  in  the  male  being  much  thicker, 
and  occupying  a  moiety  of  the  length  of  the  organ.  The  abdomen  is  broad, 
and  more  rounded  in  the  female,  with  lateral,  but  no  median  spots.     The 


122  1)ISEASES 

color  is  bright  yellow,  spots  darker;  the  bands  on  the  head  are  blackish- 
brown.     Length  of  the  female  is  l-5mm.,  of  the  male  14mm." 

My  dog  soap  will  destroy  lice  if  thoroughly  and  well  rubbed  in,  allowed 
to  remain  on  dog  for  half  an  hour,  when  you  can  rinse  off  and  dry  the 
dog.  If  in  winter,  ^cold  or  damp  weather,  you  must  of  course  be  careful 
and  not  expose  dog  to  danger  of  catching  cold.  It  is  the  only  preparation 
in  the  way  of  a  dog  soap  that  will  kill  lice,  containing  one  ingredient  which 
is  a  secret,  that  enables  it  to  do  such  good  work  in  exterminating  the  pests 
that  dogs  are  liable  to  have,  and  yet  perfectly  harmless  to  the  dog,  even 
if  he  should  lick  it,  being  non-poisonous  as  well  as  being  excellent  for 
the  coat  and  a  great  hair  grower.  I  may  here  add  that  it  is  just  as  good 
in  every  way  for  use  on  the  owner's  head  as  it  is  for  his  dog.  In  using 
my  soap  to  rid  a  dog  of  lice,  give  dog  a  most  thorough  shampooing  with 
your  hands,  not  missing  a  spot  on  his  body  from  tip  of  nose  to  end  of 
tail.  Rub  as  close  up  to  and  around  the  eye  as  you  can  without  getting 
it  into  the  eye,  but  no  particular  harm  could  come  if  the  lather  get  in  the 
eye.  Repeat  this  application  the  same  way  twenty-four  hours  later,  this 
to  kill  the  youngsters  that  breed  every  twenty-four  hours. 

After  the  application  has  been  on  dog  for  an  hour,  you  can  then 
rinse  in  lukewarm  water  and  dry  thoroughly  with  a  rough  towel.  The 
same  care  as  to  dog  being  exposed  to  cold  air  or  draughts  must  be  exer- 
cised as  in  an  ordinary  bath.  My  soap  can  well  be  termed  a  wonderful 
discovery,  and  it  is  without  doubt  by  far  the  best  dog  soap  ever  made. 

Here  is  another  treatment  to  givo: 

"Lice,  the  presence  of  which  gives  rise  to  the  affection  sometimes 
termed  phthiriasis,  are  of  common  distribution,  as  parasites  throughout 
the  animal  kingdom.  Two  varieties  affect  the  dog,  namely,  the  Hcemato- 
pinus  Piliferus,  and  the  Trichodectes  Latus.'  The  first  of  these,  as  a  rule, 
Is  chiefly  found  about  the  head,  ears,  etc.,  but  may  wander  over  any  part 
of  the  body;  the  second  is  found  over  various  other  parts  of  the  body, 
and  appears  to  play  an  important  part  in  the  life  history  of  the  tapeworm, 
the  eggs  of  which  it  may  eat,  and  so  act  as  an  'intermediary  bearer'  of 
the  internal  parasite,  which  finds  its  way  into  the  alimentary  canal  through 
the  accidental  swallowing  by  the  dog,  of  the  external  parasite. 

"Both  species  of  parasite  are  destitute  of  wings,  yellowish  grey  or 
yellow  in  color,  and  have  their  mouths  specially  adapted  for  sucking. 
Pediculi  always  cause  more  or  less  itching,  consequently  a  tendency  to 
■cratch.  This  is  not  all,  but  in  many  cases  they  lead  to  the  formation  of 
scabs. 

"The  female  is  larger  than  the  male,  and  deposits  her  eggs,  or  nits, 
upon  the  hairs,  attaching  each  one  thereto  by  a  tough  transparent  sheath. 
The  female  lays  about  50  eggs,  wEtich  are  hatched  in  two  days. 

Treatment. — It  is  not  usually  a  very  difficult  matter  to  get  rid  of  lice. 
Thorough  cleanliness  is  essential,  with  disinfection  and  destruction  of  all 
material  with  which  the  animal  has  been  in  contact.  Sucking  pups  are 
frequently  affected,  in  which  case  the  treatment  must  be  directed  to  both 
parent  and  offspring.  After  cleansing  of  the  kennel,  destruction  of  the 
bedding  material,  etc.,  the  former  should  be  washed  with  soft  soap  and 
warm  wat«r,  afterwards  dressed  with  the  following  solution:  Stavesacre 
seads  1  ounce,  water  1  quart.     The  seed  must  be  boiled  for  about  an  hour 


DISEASES  123 

in  Water,  and  then  adding  sufficienl  water  to  bring  if  up  to  a  quart  again. 
With  this  the  dog  should  be  thoroughly  dressed  from  head  to  tail,  taking 
care  not  to  leave  one  hair  untouched.  It  is  certain  death  to  both  parasite 
and  eggs.  After  24  hours  it  may  be  washed  off,  and,  if  necessary,  applied 
again.  The  suckling  pups  must  be  combed  before  being  given  back  to  their 
mother.  This  must  be  repeated  daily,  until  they  are  perfectly  free  from 
vermin.  They  may  also  be  dressed  with  the  same  solution,  but  it  should 
be  diluted,  five  ounces  of  camphor  being  added  to  five  ounces  of  camphor 
water.  Of  course  washing  is  here  inadmissable.  Another  remedy,  which 
is  equally  effectual,  is  a  weak  solution  of  lime  and  sulphur  lotion,  whilst 
for  animals  of  a  more  mature  age,  it  may  be  used  of  the  ordinary  strength." 

The  following  will  also  destroy  lice: 

Flour    of   sulphur    1   pound 

Unslacked   lime    y2    pound 

Water    1  gallon 

Slake  the  lime  in  the  water,  stir  in  the  sulphur,  adding  water  gradually 
until  it  is  of  a  creamy  consistence,  then  add  the  remainder  of  the  gallon 
and  boil  down  to  half  a  gallon;  let  it  stand  till  cool,  pour  off  the  clear 
liquid,  and  make  the  quantity  to  two  and  a  half  quarts  with  cold  water. 
If  the  coat  and  skin  is  thoroughly  saturated  with  this,  and  left  on  for  ten 
minutes,  the  vermin  will  all  be  dead,  when  the  dog  should  then  be  well 
washed,  using  warm  water,  and  thoroughly  combed  and  dried.  This  may 
be  too  strong  a  solution  for  delicate  toy  dogs  with  tender  skins,  and  can 
be  reduced  in  strength  by  adding  equal  parts  of  water  to  one  of  the  lotion. 
If  any  doubt  exists  as  to  this,  first  try  the  weaker  solution. 

Another  and  a  harmless  and  non-poisonous  remedy  for  lice  is  Eber- 
hart's  Skin  Cure,  which  will  do  the  work  if  wrell  rubbed  in,  never  missing 
a  spot  on  the  dog,  allowed  to  remain  in  for  half  an  hour,  and  applied  again 
twenty-four  hours  later. 

These  dressings  should  be  repeated  in  eight  days,  in  order  to  destroy 
the  young  lice  from  the  "nits"  or  eggs,  laid  before  the  previous  dressing. 

Here,  I  give  also,  a  very  good  article  on  Lice,  which  I  found  some- 
where, and  it  is  worth  including: 

"Lice  cause  great  irritation  and  will  eventually,  if  means  are  not  taken 
to  rid  the  dog  of  the  living  burden,  take  the  blood  out  of  the  dog  and  even- 
tually cause  death.  Of  course  that  is  extreme,  but  a  bunch  of  such  para- 
sites if  not  heroically  handled  will  soon  get  ahead  of  the  operator  and 
then  there  is  nothing  to  do  but  shave  the  animal  and  give  it  a  strong 
soaking  in  some  mixture  that  will  kill  the  'nits.'  Mercurial  ointment  is 
a  sure  knocker,  but  it  is  not  advisable  for  the  novice  to  use  unless  in- 
structed in  its  application  and  the  precaution  to  be  taken  that  the  dog 
does  not  lick  the  ointment  afterwards  and  thus  become  more  or  less 
poisoned.  This  is  obviated  by  muzzling  until  the  ointment  wears  off,  or 
is  washed  off. 

The  best  thing  we  have  found  is  an  emulsion  made  of  one-third  very 
hot  milk  mixed  with  two-thirds  kerosene  oil.  We  generally  mix  it  in  a 
kandy  bottle  with  a  shake  stopper  and  opening  the  coat  drop  in  the  emul- 


124  DISEASES 

sion  which  of  course  must  be  well  shaken  while  being  applied.  The  milk 
counteracts  any  blistering  of  the  skin  that  might  arise  from  the  application 
of  the  oil  alone.  This  kills  everything  living  and  saturates  the  eggs  which 
are  the  source  of  course  of  future  trouble,  and  the  reason  some  people 
find  it  impossible  to  get  rid  of  lice  while  the  dog  lives.  This  treatment 
is  not  only  death  to  lice,  but  life  to  the  coat,  bringing  it  out  in  glossy 
profusion.  The  milk  must  be  very  hot,  but  not  boiling  or  it  will  curdle 
in  the  oil.  When  the  emulsion  has  dried  in,  it  is  well  to  wash  the  dog, 
though  this  is  not  absolutely  necessary  unless  the  odor  of  kerosene  is 
offensive. 

However  many  cures  one  may  make  the  best  one  is  prevention  and 
the  measures  to  be  adopted  will  occur  to  any  intelligent  dog  owner.  At  the 
same  time  if  it  is  a  case  of  the  home  dog  as  above,  it  is  very  difficult  to 
handle  and  unless  periodic  treatment  is  given  the  dog  the  trouble  will  get 
ahead  before  you  are  aware.  In  the  kennels  one  may  adopt  heroic 
measures  in  the  way  of  burning  partitions  and  the  like  nests,  but  in  a 
kitchen,  however  clean,  it  may  be  kept,  there  are  little  nooks  and  cracks 
that  cannot  be  so  strenuously  treated,  for  the  dog  may  lie  around  in  many 
places.  Applications  of  strong  disinfectants  like  'Standard  Disinfectant'  is 
very  good  for  this  purpose." — See  their  ad.  in  this  book. 

Naturally  dogs  that  are  kept  in  clean  auar*Qrs  and  groomed  every 
day  do  not  have  lice  unless,  as  we  hinted  above,  they  touch  some  dog  that 
has  lice  or  come  in  contact  with  some  place  where  lice  dogs  frequent.  This 
may  seem  superfluous  advice  to  the  wise  owner  of  dogs,  but  it  is  just  this 
ignorance  on  the  part  of  novice  owners  of  dogs  that  breeds  lice  and  kin- 
dred parasites,  that  start  skin  troubles  and  all  sorts  of  derangements  sauced 
by  continual  scratching  and  the  nervous  condition  in  which  a  dog  infested 
with  lice  soon  finds  itself.  The  emulsion  spoken  of  above  may  be  used 
with  safety  on  any  dog.  Should  a  pet  dog  start  any  such  trouble,  rubbing 
with  alcohol  will  usually  put  a  quietus  on  the  vermin. 

The  writer  has  just  tried,  for  the  first  time,  "Standard  Disinfectant," 
on  an  Irish  setter  that  came  back  from  a  show  with  lice  he  got  there,  and 
in  two  thorough  applications,  using  a  stiff  brush  to  apply  it,  I  cleared 
this  dog  of  the  lice.  I  put  three  ounces  "Standard  Disinfectant"  in  a  pail, 
then  added  a  gallon  of  water  to  it,  and  then  used  a  sponge  for  his  head — ■ 
then  use  a  stiff  brush  for  rest  of  his  body,  legs  and  tail,  applying  it  liberally. 
In  ten  minutes  after  I  thoroughly  dried  him  with  rough  towels.  Only  two 
applications  were  necessary  in  his  case,  as  I  did  not  miss  a  spot  on  him, 
but  sometimes  it  might  be  necessary  for  more  applications,  if  you  had 
missed  a  few  lice. 

A  special  article  from  Field  and  Fancy: 

Pleurisy — Covering  the  lungs  and  reflected  over  the  walls  of  the  chest 
is  a  very  fine,  smooth,  delicate,  glistening  membrane  known  as  the  pleura. 
This  membrane  is  moistened  by  a  fluid  that,  in  connection  with  the  smooth, 
polished  surface  of  the  membrane,  permits  of  the  easy,  frictionless  move- 
ments of  the  lungs  during  breathing.  Sometimes  as  a  result  of  wounds, 
bruises  or  injuries,  more  commonly  as  the  result  of  colds  and  occasionally 
for  no  appreciable  cause,  this  membrane  becomes  inflamed,  and  we  have  a 


— - « —  DISEASES  125 

most  painful  disease  known  as  pleurisy.  In  this  disease  the  lubricating 
fluid  previously  mentioned  disappears.  The  glistening  surface  of  the  mem- 
brane becomes  swollen  and  roughened,  so  that  in  breathing  the  part  of  the 
membrane  covering  the  lungs  and  the  part  reflected  over  the  walls  of  the 
chest  rub  together  and  make  breathing  a  most  painful  process.  This  stage 
lasts  about  twenty-four  hours,  and  then  the  lubricating  fluid  that  disappears 
at  the  first  sign  of  the  disease  begins  to  reappear  in  increased  quantities 
and  there  is  a  general  effusion  into  the  chest  cavity  on  the  affected  side. 
In  some  cases  this  effusion  is  so  great  as  to  almost  or  completely  fill  the 
space  formerly  occupied  by  the  lungs,  and  they  are  compressed  into  a  small 
mass  and  rendered  entirely  useless.  In  acute  attacks  of  this  disease  that 
terminate  in  recovery  there  is,  in  a  few  days,  a  reabsorption  of  this  fluid, 
and  the  pleura  regains  its  normal  condition.  If  the  reabsorption  of  the 
fluid  in  the  cavity  is  slow  or  delayed  and  extends  over  a  period  of  two  or 
three  weeks  the  patient  is  left  with  what  is  known  as  chronic  pleurisy. 

Symptoms:  In  some  cases  there  is  a  soreness  of  the  chest  for  two 
or  three  days  to  which  no  attention  has  been  paid;  in  other  cases  there  is 
a  severe  chill,  accompanied  by  shivering  and  intense  pain  in  breathing,  so 
that  the  animal  does  not  completely  fill  the  lungs,  but  takes  short,  quick, 
catchy  breaths.  There  is  a  cough  and  all  the  symptoms  of  fever,  such  as 
restlessness,  increased  thirst,  loss  of  appetite,  watery  eyes;  anxious,  wor- 
ried expression;  hot,  dry  nose  and  coated  tongue.  The  veins  of  the  eyeball 
and  lips  darken  in  color.  The  animal  lies  on  the  affected  side  so  as  to  allow 
the  opposite  lung  more  opportunity  to  expand. 

An  examination  of  the  chest  will  show  a  restrained  movement  of  the 
lungs.  The  characteristic  sounds-  in  the  first  stage,  are  a  dry,  grating,  rasp- 
ing sound  caused  by  the  inflamed  and  roughened  surfaces  of  the  pleurae 
rubbing  against  each  other.  After  effusion  of  the  liquid  has  taken  place, 
we  have  the  second  stage  of  the  disease.  This  is  easily  determined  by  per- 
cussion. Press  two  or  three  fingers  of  one  hand  flat  and  firmly  against 
the  chest  wall  and  strike  them  with  one  or  two  fingers  of  the  other  hand. 
The  blows  should  be  quick,  short  and  light.  Strike  only  once  on  each 
spot,  and  move  the  hand  quickly  from  one  spot  to  another  until  the  entire 
chest  has  been  covered.  If  this  be  done  to  both  the  well  and  affected  side, 
a  rapid  comparison  can  be  made  of  the  difference  in  sound.  If  the  sound 
given  forth  is  dead,  flat  and  woodeny,  it  denotes  an  absence  of  air  in  that 
part  of  the  chest  and  indicates  that  the  chest  cavity  is  filled  with  fluid 
and  the  lung  compressed  into  a  solid  mass.  On  auscultation  the  respiratory 
sound  is  entirely  suppressed  or  only  faintly  heard.  An  examination  of  the 
chest  of  normal  dogs  both  by  auscultation  and  percussion  will  familiarize 
the  owner  with  the  natural  sounds  so  that  he  will  have  no  difficulty  in 
recognizing  the  departures  and  variations  in  disease. 

The  pulse  in  pleurisy  is  quite  diagnostic  of  the  disease,  being  quick, 
hard,  wiry  and  much  faster  than  normal.  The  temperature  varies  from 
101  to  103. 

Prognosis:  Pleurisy,  although  a  painful  disease,  is  simple  as  com- 
pared to  pneumonia  or  bronchitis.  As  a  rule  only  one  side  is  affected,  and 
in  the  absence  of  pus,  the  disease  generally  terminates  favorably. 

Treatment:  In  diseases  of  the  chest  as  in  all  other  diseases,  diet  and 
hygienic  surroundings  are  of  the  utmost  importance.     The  object  in   the 


126  DISEASES 

first  state  is  to  relieve  the  pain  and  suffering  and  if  possible,  to  check  the 
progress  of  the  disease.  This  is  best  accomplished  by  giving  a  dose  of 
Dover's  powder,  varying  in  size  from  five  to  thirty  grains,  depending  upon 
the  size  of  the  dog.  This  will  relieve  the  pain,  quiet  the  patient  and  thus 
limit  the  constitutional  disturbance.  The  chest  jacket,  described  in  the 
treatment  of  pneumonia,  should  then  be  applied,  as  it  is  a  great  protec- 
tion. 

If  a  dose  or  two  of  Dover's  powder  early  in  the  disease,  does  not  check 
its  course,  the  following  prescription  may  be  used: 

Morphine   Sulphates    ■ two   grains 

Tr.  Aconite  Rad twenty  drops 

Aquae three  oz. 

Ft.   Mist  Sig. 

Dose  is  one  teaspoonful,  every  four  hours,  until  the  animal  is  quiet 
and  inclined  to  sleep. 

If  the  fluid  within  the  chest  cavity  docs  not  disappear  within  a  week, 
there  is  danger  of  its  becoming  purulent.  A  veterinary  surgeon  or  physi- 
cian should  be  called  in  to  tap  the  chest,  low  down  and  far  back  and  draw 
part  of  the  fluid  with  an  asperating  needle  or  a  trochar  and  canula. 

If  the  bowels  do  not  move  freely,  they  can  be  opened  and  kept  so  by 
the  syrup  of  buckthorn  in  tablespoc-nful  doses,  repeated  as  often  as  may 
be  necessary.  If  the  animal  is  very  weak,  or  the  general  strength  seems 
to  be  impaired  by  the  use  of  these  laxatives,  they  should  be  dispensed  with. 

Keep  up  the  animal's  strength  by  feeding  raw,  lean  beef,  chopped  fine, 
raw  eggs,  milk  punch,  mutton  broths  and  anything  he  will  eat  of  a  nour- 
ishing nature.  After  the  fever  abates  and  the  crisis  has  passed,  the  emul- 
sion of  cod  liver  oil  in  tablespoon ful  doses  should  be  given  three  or  four 
times  a  day.     A  good  tonic  pill  is  prepared  as  follows:  / 

Sulphate   of  Quinine    12  grains 

Sulphate  of  Iron    12  grains 

Extract   of   Gentian    12  grains 

Powdered    Ginger     12  grains 

Diastase     3  grains 

Pepsin     2  4  grains 

Make  into  twelve  pills  and  give  one  night  and  morning. 

Pneumonia — See  Lungs,  Inflammation  of.  An  inflammation  of  the 
substance  of  the  lungs  is  generally  the  result  of  exposure  to  cold  and  damp. 
The  first  stage  of  the  disease  is  announced  with  shiverings,  followed  by 
fever.  Sometimes,  in  the  worst  cases,  it  is  accompanied  by  pleurisy,  which 
is  inflammation  of  what  is  called  the  lung-case,  and,  in  such  instances,  it 
usually  proves  fatal.  In  fact,  whether  the  pneumonia  is  or  is  hot  accom- 
panied by  pleurisy  there  is  always  some  risk  of  a  fatal  termination. 

Pneumonia  admits  of  no  delay  in  management,  but  must  be  treated 
al  once  i> v  giving  a  solution  of  acetate  of  ammonia  to  reduce  the  fever-— 


GERMAN  SHEPHERD  DOGS 


ELHVIEW  KENNELS 

ELMHURST,  PA. 

=  THE  HOME  OF  THE  CHAMPIONS  = 


1NTERNATIONAL  CHAMPION  APPOLLO  VON  HUNENSTEIN  P.H. 


We  can  supply  dogs  of  all  ages  for  show,  pets  or  work. 
The  greatest  selection  of  stud  dogs  in  this  country. 

AT  STl  1>. 

International  Champion  Apollo  von  Hunenstein,   Champion  Austria. 
1913,  Belgium  1913,  French  1914. 

Champion  of  record  in  America FEE  $50.00 

Champion   Nero   Affolter    FEE    $50.00 

For  further  information  write 

512  SCRANTON  LIFE  BLDG.,   SCRANTON,  PA. 


128  DISEASES 

castor  oil  having  first  been  given  in  a  liberal  dose.  The  dose  of  the  so- 
lution of  acetate  of  ammonia  for  a  matured  dog  (one  over  a  year  old) 
would  be  for  a  fox  terrier  or  an  English  setter,  a  teaspoonful  every  three 
or  four  hours  until  fever  is  subdued.  Larger  dogs  like  a  St.  Bernard, 
greyhound  or  a  Great  Dane,  a  teaspoon  and  a  half  could  be  given.  If 
the  malady  is  not  checked  at  this  stage,  it  quickly  passes  on  into  a  second 
stage,  when  hepatization  takes  place.  The  cough  now  is  frequent  and 
accompanied  by  expectoration,  and  respiration  is  performed  with  great 
effort  and  pain,  and  the  general  expression  is  haggard  and  pitiful  in  the 
extreme.  '  "When  it  has  reached  this  stage  a  warm  poultice  of  linseed 
meal  should  be  placed  in  the  region  of  the  lungs,  and  be  renewed  several 
times,  care  being  taken  that  after  the  first  poultice  a  piece  of  flannel  is 
bound  over  the  spot,  lest  the  patient  should  take  a  fresh  chill. 

After  the  fever  has  subsided,  tonic  treatment  will  be  necessary,  and 
for  this  there  is  nothing  better  than  quinine,  the  dose  of  which  would  be 
about  two  grains  every  three  hours  for  setters  and  pointers,  and  more  in 
proportion  for  larger  dogs.  For  toy  or  smaller  dogs  one  grain  is  enough. 
Solid  food  must  be  entirely  withheld  until  the  patient  has  quite  recovered; 
he  must  be  dieted  on  such  things  as  beef  tea,  milk,  broth,  etc.  Finally,  the 
cure  will  have  to  be  made  complete  by  a  course  of  some  good  tonic  pill, 
in  which  iron  is  one  of  the  ingredients.  Clayton's,  or  Sergeant's,  or  Dent's 
Condition  Pills  are  good  to  use  now.  I  can  furnish  either  by  return  mail 
if  you  cannot  find  them  in  your  own  town. 

Peritonitis. — See  Bowels,  Inflammation  of. 

Penis,  Discharge  from  (Balanitis).— A  great  many  dogs  suffer  from  an 
inflammation  and  excited  state  of  the  organs  of  generation,  having  frequent 
partial  erections,  with  a  discharge  of  a  thick  yellowish  matter,  very  loath- 
some if  in  a  house  dog.  Treatment  consists  in  bathing  the  parts  frequently 
with  cold  water,  giving  quite  a  strong  dose  of  ordinary  black  draught  and 
the  following  medicine: 

Bicarbonate  of  soda 2        drams 

Bicarbonate  of  potash    2        drams 

Tincture   of  henbane    3        drams 

Mindererous    spirit    1  y2    ounce 

Water    to    make    6        ounces 

Dose  for  a  toy  dog  up  to  20  lbs.  a  teaspoonful  four  or  five  times  a  day. 
Larger  dogs  a  tablespoonful.  The  prepuce  should  also  be  syringed 
with  weak  Condy's  Fluid  or  a  lotion  of  boracic  acid,  one  scruple 
to  six  ounces  of  water.  Give  the  dog  barley  water  to  drink  and 
very  little  meat.  Milk  and  broth  with  chopped  green  vegetables 
(cooked)   would  be  most  suitable  in  such  cases. 

Paralysis — Paralysis  is  due  to  pressure  or  injury  of  brain  or  to  spinal 
cord.  If  one  side  of  the  brain  is  affected,  the  opposite  side  of  the  body 
will  be  paralyzed;  but  if  the  whole  of  the  brain  is  implicated,  the  paralysis 


DISEASES  129 

will  be  general.  When  it  arises  from  injury  to  the  spine,  it  is  the  parts 
behind  that  power  ,  that  are  affected.  Paralysis  often  follows  distemper; 
the  hindquarters  suffer;  in  severe  cases  the  dog  losing  the  use  of  his  hind 
legs,  dragging  them  along.  In  such  a  case  the  muscles  of  the  thigh  will 
soon  shrivel,  and  a  cure  is  very  rare.  Chronic  constipation  also  produces 
paralysis,  and  may  come,  as  the  result  of  general  debility  and  old  age. 
Believers  in  dumb  rabies  say  that  paralysis  of  the  lower  jaw  renders  the 
animal  incapable  of  biting.  Most  everyone  is  familiar  with  the  appearance 
of  paralysis,  the  loss  of  muscular  power  and  constant  wasting  away  of  the 
muscles  in  the  part  affected.  Paralysis  may  be  general,  but  is  in  most 
cases  confined  to  one  set  of  muscles,  ranging  from  a  slight  tottering  gait  to 
complete  loss  of  power  and  inability  to  walk.  Loss  of  power  and  wasting 
of  the  hindquarter  may  also  be  caused  by  tapeworm.  So  long  as  the  dog 
can  use  his  limbs  he  should  be  given  regular  gentle  exercise.  The  food 
must  be  nourishing  and  rather  laxative.  Oatmeal  porridge  mixed  with  a 
strong  beef  or  mutton  broth,  every  other  day,  will  generally  have  a  gentle 
action  on  the  bowels,  with  a  meal  once  a  week  of  boiled  liver,  which  will 
have  a  laxative  effect. 

If  the  disease  is  connected  with  debility  the  strength  must  be  gotten 
up  by  extra  food,  giving  more  than  usual  of  cooked  meat,  in  small  quan- 
tities but  fed  oftener  than  usual.  The  medicines  in  paralysis  are  tonics,  and 
strychnine — the  active  principle  of  nux  vomica — which  has  a  special  power 
over  the  muscles  and  nerves.  One  to  three  grains  of  powdered  nux  vomica, 
according  to  size  and  age  of  the  dog,  or  from  one-twentieth  to  of?e-six- 
teenth  of  a  grain  of  strychnine,  with  two  to  six  grains  of  extract  of  gen- 
tian, and  one  or  two  grains  of  quinine  made  into  a  pill.  Great  care  must 
be  used  in  compounding  the  pills,  containing  as  they  do  such  a  powerful 
drug  as  strychnine.  Give  a  pill  twice  a  day.  In  mild  cases  of  paralysis, 
syrup  of  the  phosphates,  with  strychnia  (called  Easten's  syrup),  is  often 
of  great  service.  In  lieu  of  the  latter  tonics,  a  handier  thing  to  do  is  to 
use  Sergeant's  Condition  Pills,  which  contain  strychnine  and  other  good 
tonic  properties.  In  paralysis  of  the  hind  legs  the  bladder  generally  par- 
ticipates, the  dog  being  unable  to  stand,  and  cannot  pass  the  urine  freely. 
Use  the  catheter  in  such  cases  night  and  morning,  or  the  dog  held  up  and 
pressure  applied  to  each  side  in  the  region  of  the  bladder  to  expel  its  con- 
tents. As  a  preventive  of  bed  sores  and  congestion  of  one  lung  turn  the 
dog  over  occasionally. 

Here  is  a  case  that  was  prescribed  for  by  Dent: 

"Please  prescribe  for  my  English  setter  dog,  eight  months  old.  Last 
November  I  hunted  him  through  the  month,  in  December  he  lost  the  use 
of  his  hindlegs,  and  in  January  seemed  to  lose  the  use"  of  all  four  legs; 
appetite  was  good  at  all  times,  eyes  were  bright,  nose  cold,  seemed  in 
perfect  health  except  in  his  legs.  I  doctored  him  a  while  for  rheumatism 
but  stopped  about  four  weeks  ago,  and  about  one  week  ago  he  seemed 
to  get  a  little  better.  Can  now  use  his  front  legs,  can  manage  to  sit  up 
and  draw  himself  around  with  a  half  limp,  the  back  legs  being  useless  now. 
Will  he  get  well  and  is  it  rheumatism  or  is  he  paralyzed?  Ans. — Give  a 
teaspoonful  of  the  syrup  of  hypophosphites  three  times  a  day,  also  give 
one-half  grain  of  nux  vomica  twice  a  day.     It  is  paralysis." 


i:;o  DISEASES 

The  following  ia  a  case  of  Partial  Paralysis,  or  congestion  of  the  spina* 
cord,  prescribed  for  by  Dent.     You  might  have  a  similar  case,  so  I  give  it: 

"My  pointer  dog,  three  years  old,  weight  forty-rive  puunds,  was  taken 
sick  last  November  in  the  field,  let  down  in  the  back,  has  since  grown  worse, 
will  now  lie  around  and  at  times  cry  from  pain;  he  will  crawl  around  on 
his  front  feet  and  drag  his  hindquarters  when  first  taken  out  of  the 
kennel,  then  will  gradually  get  up  on  his  hind  feet  and  down  on  his  fore- 
feet, walking  behind  and  crawling  in  front,  and  in  a  few  moments  will 
get  up  on  all  four  feet,  but  walks  very  stiffly  and  only  remains  up  for  a 
short  time  until  he  goes  down.  Please  name  disease  and  treatment.  Ans. 
— Give  your  dog  one-half  grain  of  nux  vomica,  five  drops  of  Fowler's  Solu- 
tion of  Arsenic  and  a  tablespoonful  of  Fellows'  Syrup  of  the  Hypophos- 
phites  of  Soda  three  times  a  day.  The  disease  is  a  partial  congestion  of 
the   spinal   cord." 

Paralysis  in  Bitches  Before  Parturition. — The  following  case  is,  I  am 
glad  to  say,  not  common.  Mr.  Caswell,  of  England,  furnishes  this  exper- 
ience, and  I  insert  it  as  he  gives  it,  as  it  may  be  beneficial  in  similar  cases, 
should  they  occur.  It  is  probable  that  the  extreme  hot  weather  con- 
tributed to  the  development  of  the  disease.  The  treatment  was  about  the 
best,  and  all  that  could  have  been  done: 

"Within  the  past  month  I  have  had  three  beagle  bitches  taken  sick 
shortly*  before  whelping,  all  exhibiting  the  same  symptoms,  viz.,  paralysis 
of  the  hindquarters  and  great  labor  in"  breathing;  for  this  I  gave  stimu- 
lants (whisky)  and  rubbed  the  loins  with  mustard,  also  continued  massage 
of  the  belly  and  loins.  In  the  first  case  labor  pains  came  on  and  the  bitch 
had  one  pup,  after  which  paralysis  set  in  again  and  the  remaining  two 
pups  were  removed  with  the  forceps  with  great  trouble.  The  bitch  died. 
Postmortem  appearances  showed  that  septicemia  had  set  in.  In  the  second 
case,  after  exactly  similar  symptoms,  massage  was  again  tried,  and  even 
though  the  bitch  seemed  very  far  gone,  she  revived.  The  best  obtainable 
veterinary  surgeon  was  in  attandance,  and  decided  to  wait  awhile  before 
performing  a  Caesarian  operation.  Stimulants  revived  the  bitch  once  more 
and  she  had  five  healthy  pups,  and  is  nursing  them  now  very  well.  The 
third  case  started  with  paralysis  and  the  bitch  revived  two  or  three  times 
under  treatment  as  before,  then  died  without  pupping.  Postmortem  re- 
vealed three  pups,  all  placed  rather  far  forward.  This  bitch  was  not 
within  two  weeks  of  whelping  time.  She  showed  normal  appearance,  was 
in  excellent  condition,  had  been  kept  in  a  large  run  and  given  exercise 
daily,  as  were  the  others. 

"This  is  the  first  time  I  have  seen  this  paralysis  in  ten  years  of 
breeding.  The  last  two  bitches  had  reared  litters  all  right  before.  Can  you 
tell  me  the  cause,  as  the  veterinarians  about  me  seem  unable  to  do  so?  Also 
if  the  extremely  hot  weather  has  had  anytihng  to  do  with  it." 

Piles. — This  occurs  -more  frequently  in  house  dogs  or  those  confined 
too  closely  to  their  kennel,  being  an  enlarged  condition  of  the  hemorrhoidal 
veini  at  the  lower  part  of  the  rectum,  presenting  an  enlarged,  swollen  and 
Under  appearance,  which  gives  pain  when  touched,  ©r  when  the  dog  drags 


DISHASaS  131 

himself  along  the  ground.  Piles  are  internal  and  external,  .as  they  exist 
within  or  without  the  muscle  that  contacts  the  orifice  of  the  anus.  The 
disease  is  readily  ascertained  as  the  condition  of  the  parts  are  naturally 
small,  firm  and  contracted.  Piles  are  produced  by  over-feeding  with  too 
much  stimulating  food,  want  of  sufficient  and  healthful  exercise,  produc- 
ing diseases  of  the  liver,  constipation  of  the  bowels,  consequent  straining  and 
undue  distension  of  the  parts  in  the  act  of  fecation.  The  diet  in  a  cure 
of  piles  should  be  laxatives,  very  little  meat,  but  a  portion  of  boiled  liver 
may  be  allowed  with  broth  or  in  soups,  oatmeal  well  boiled  and  vegetables. 
As  a  mild  aperient  a  little  milk  of  sulphur  shoud  be  given  in  milk  or  with 
the  food.  Dose  would  be  a  heaped  up  teaspoonful  for  a  dog  of  20  lbs., 
larger  and  smaller  in  proportion.  Here  are  some  ointments,  either  of  which 
can  be  used: 

Ointments  for  Piles. — Mild  mersurial  ointment,  7  parts,  finely  powder- 
ed camphor,  1  part,  well  mixed;  or  the  compound  gall  ointment  of  the 
Pharmacopoeia  may  be  used.  Hazeline  is  also   very  beneficial. 

In  bleeding  piles  the  following  injection  may  be  used:  Tincture  of  kra- 
meria,  2  drams,  water  to  6  ounces.  Two  ounces  should  be  injected  twice 
a  day;  while  in  all  cases  of  Piles  Va  dram  to  2  drams  of  tincture  of 
krameria  in  water,  twice  a  day,  will  be  useful. 

In  some  cases  of  piles  a  tumor  forms  near  the  orific  of  the  rectum;  it  is 
at  first  red,  but  afterward  becomes  purple,  and  finally  discharges  a  thick 
fetid  matter  with  blood.  It  forms  a  ragged  sore,  difficult  to  heal  from 
movements  of  the  dog  in  the  natural  act,  and  from  dragging  himself  along 
the  ground.  Similar  treatment  to  that  already  advised  should  be  given, 
using  the  ointment  and  washing  with  the  following  lotion  alternately. 

Wash  for  Tumor j — Goulard's  water,  %  pint;  laudanum,  %  ounce; 
tincture  of  arnica,    %    ounce;   mixed. 

Periostitis  (Inflammation  of  the  Periostem,  the  Membrane  Covering  of 
the  Bone,  is  not  often  met  with  in  the  dog,  usually  arising  from  direct  in- 
pries.  It  is  a  most  painful  disease,  the  membrane  becomes  greatly  inflam- 
ed and  swollen,  separated  from  the  bone,  while  frequently  deposits  of  bone 
the  result,  which  cause  lumps  that  are  unsightly.  The  symptoms  are  heat 
and  swelling  of  the  skin  over  the  affected  parts,  great  pain  upon  manipu- 
lation, feverishness  and  lameness  when  it  occurs  in  a  limb.  Quiet  is  very 
essential.  Apply  hot  flannels  to  the  part,  or  in  severe  cases,  hot  linseed 
poultices  will  be  better.  If  lumps  remain  after  the  swelling  has  left  the 
part,  then  paint  these  with  tincture  of  iodine,  discontinuing  this  when  the 
skin  becomes  sore.  I  prefer  to  apply  Iodin  Vasigin,  full  strength,  as  it  does 
not  make  the  skin  sore,  and  can  be  rubbed  in  with  the  hand,  twice  daily. 

Parturient  Apoplexy. — See  Milk  Fever. 

Pleurisy — See  Inflammation  of  Lungs. 

Pharyngitis  (Inflammation  of  the  Pharynx) — This  disease  frequently 
affeats  dogs.  True  pharyngitis  is  usually  due  to  soma  foreign  body  lodg«d 
in  the  pharynx,  although  it  has  been  caused  by  strong  drugs  given  with 


132  DISEASES 

the  object  of  curing  disease.  In  such  cases  the  stomach  suffers  also.  Symp- 
toms are  a  dry,  irritating  cough  and  a  difficulty  in  swallowing  is  observed 
later  on,  the  dog  showing  pain  in  swallowing;  a  contraction  of  the  muscles 
of  the  throat  shown,  and  upon  manipulation  the  pain  is  plainly  shown. 
Upon  opening  the  mouth  and  examining  the  throat  it  will  be  found  red  and 
swollen,  and  unless  the  inflammation  is  checked  ulceration  of  the  throat 
will  follow  quickly;  or  abscesses  form,  which  will  cause  a  discharge  through 
the  nostrils.  v      t.  ,—_,.   ^t\m\^ 

Treatment. — Ascertain  the  cause  and  try  to  remove  it.  If  condition  is 
clue  to  foreign  matter,  this  must  be  moved,  and  with  hot  linseed  poultice 
(kept  in  position  by  a  bandage)  applied  to  the  neck.  Nothing  solid  must  be 
given  to  eat,  feed  milk,  eggs  or  Bovine.  This  simple  treatment  will  gen- 
erally effect  a  cure,  but  should  ulceration  occur,  then  paint  the  part  with 
a  weak  solution  of  nitrate  of  silver — 2  grains  of  this  to  V2  ounce  of 
distilled  water — night  and  morning  with  a  camel's  hair  brush.  If  ulcera- 
tion is  severe  and  granulations  present,  touch  the  latter  with  "London 
Paste,"  best  applied  on  the  point  of  a  probe,  around  which  is  rolled  a 
piece  of  wool.  If  pharyngeal  abscesses  form  they  must  be  lanced  to  empty 
contents.  The  dog  will  be  left  in  a  debilitated  state  when  the  acute  symp- 
toms have  subsided,  due  to  the  general  constitutional  disturbance  accom- 
panying the  disease.  A  tonic  should  now  be  given.  Clayton's  or  Dent's 
Condition  Pills  will  be  just  the  thing  to  use  for  a  while. 

Polypus. — A  tumor  growing  on  some  mucous  membrane,  the  nose,  or 
the  vaginal  passage  being  attacked  by  a  stalk  or  pedicle,  varying  in  length 
and  thickness.  The  tumor  is  smooth,  of  a  red  color,  shaped  like  a  pear 
and  when  small  is  concealed  from  view,  but  protrudes  as  it  grows.  It 
discharges  a  mucus  matter  often  tinged  with  blood  and  generally  offen- 
sive in  smell. 

The  treatment  is  simple,  consisting  in  the  removal  of  the  polypus  by 
tieing  a  white  silk  thread  or  piece  of  fine  silver  wire  around  the  neck. 
Tighten  this  daily  for  a  few  days,  until  the  neck  is  cut  through  and  the 
tumor  drops  off.  Then  bathe  the  parts  freely  with  Goulard  Water.  If 
fever  exists,  a  dose  of  cooling  medicine  will  suffice,  but  this  is  rarely  ever 
necessary. 

Prolapsus  Ani. — This  sometimes  occurs  in  pampered  house  dogs  that 
are  old  and  too  fat,  and  from  insufficient  exercise  which  produces  constipa- 
tion and  causes  straining.  The  protruding  part  should  be  cleansed,  pressed 
back  into  place,  and  cold  douches  used  frequently.  Diet  should  be  laxative 
and  exercise  must  be  given.  If  the  prolapsis  recurs,  a  stitch  of  two  can  be 
inserted.     The  diet  must  then  consist  entirely  of  milk. 

Prolapsus,  or  Falling,  of  the  Vagina  is  characterized  by  a  soft,  red 
swelling,  and  generally  occurs  during,  or  immediately  after  the  period  of 
heat.  It  must  be  carefully  washed  with  lukewarm  water  and  gently  re- 
turned to  its  place.  The  following  injection  should  then  be  used  for  a  few 
days,  and  one  of  the  powders  given  twice  a  day. 

Injections  for  Prolapsus. — Tannic  acid  and  glycerine,  1  ounce;  water  to 


THE  FAMOUS 


Melbourne  English  Bulldogs 

(THE  GREATEST  STRAIN  IN  AMERICA) 

More    'Winners    Have   Been    Bred    in   These    Kennels    Than    Any    Kennel    in   the    U.    S. 

AT  STUD — TWO  FAMOUS  INTERNATIONAL  WINNERS 


MELBOURNE  K1LMAHEW 

A.    K.    ('.    220903 

(Imported) 


FEE    $25.00 

Sire  of  KILMAHEW — Kilbiirn  Regal; 
dam — Lady  Laurel,  litter  sister  to  the 
sire  of  Challenger,  England's  greatest 
Bulldog. 

KILMAHEW,  before  a  year  old,  wins 
at  the  two  big  shows  in  Europe— Glas- 
gow, Scotland,  and  London,  England, 
four  firsts,  six  specials,  three  silver 
eiips,  and  special  for  best  of  all  breeds. 


MELBOURNE    DETERMINATION 

A.    K.    C.    228045 
(Imported) 


FEE    $85.00 

Sire  of  DETERMINATION  —  Index- 
able;   dam — Inspiration. 

DETERMINATION  wins  in  Europe 
are — "The  25  Guinea  Cup,"  at  Birming- 
ham; gold  medal,  Birmingham  Bulldog 
Club;  lirst  at  West  Bromich  and  Dis- 
trict Canine  Society;  Birmingham  and 
Midland  Counties  Bulldog  Club;  Sutton, 
Goldfleld  and  Dist ri<t  Canine  Society 
Show;  .National  Dog  Show,  at  Birming- 
ham, etc. 


STUD  BOOK  MAILED  UPON   APPLICATION 


ALL  BREEDS  BOARDED   AT  REASONABLE  RATES 


MELBOURNE  KENNELS,  (registered) 

(ESTABLISHED     1903) 

Office  421  So.  Adams  St.  PEORI/\  ILL. 

GUY  HORNISH,    Prop. 


WWW  i   mil  ■■< 


134  -       DISEASES 

mak«  a  pint.  Or  tincture  of  krameria,  2  drams;  water  to  make  6  ounces. 
Two  ounces  to  be  injected  night  and  morning  with  a  female  syringe. 

Astringent  Powders  for  Prolapsus. — Take  gallic  acid  18  grains;  alum, 
12  grains;  mix,  and  divide  into  six  equal  powders,  and  give  one  twice  a  day, 
first  dissolving  them  in  hot  water,  but  allowing  them  to  cool  before  ad- 
ministration. This  dose  will  do  for  an  ordinary  sized  dog  from  a  setter 
up  to  a  St.  Bernard.  Toy  dogs  like  a  pug  and  smaller  ones,  give  half 
powder. 

Falling  of  the  vagina  must  not  be  confounded  with  inversion  of  the 
womb,  which  occasionally  happens  after  pupping,  and  which  can  only  be 
safely  treated  by  a  qualified  veterinarian. 

Pulse.— See  Temperature  and  Pulse. 

Purging — Thig  is  a  symptom  in  many  diseases,  but  it  may  exist  simply 
from  temporary  derangement  of  the  stomach,  or  from  some  irritating  sub- 
stance taken  into  the  intestines,  in  which  cases  a  dose  of  castor  oil  and  extra 
attention  to  diet  are  all  that  is  necessary. 

Polypi.— Tumors  growing  on  some  mucous  membrane,  the  nose,  ear, 
anus  or  vaginal  passage,  the  latter  most  common.  They  are  attached  by 
a  stack  or  pedicle  varying  in  length  or  thickness,  red  in  color,  smooth  and 
pear-shaped.  They  vary  in  size;  when  small  are  concealed  from  view,  but 
protrude  as  they  grow.  A  mucous  matter,  tinged  with  blood  and  offensive 
in  smell  is  sometimes  discharged. 

Treatment  consists  in  their  removal  by  tying  a  strong  white  silk  thread 
tightly  around  the  neck  of  the  polypi  till  the  neck  is  cut  through  and  the 
tumor  drops  off.  They  can  also  be  removed  by  an  ecraseur,  an  instrument 
made  for  this  purpose.  Bath*  the  parts  frtely  for  a  few  days  with  Goulard 
Water. 

Rheumatism — (This  article  was  written  especially  for  this  book  by 
"Dent." — This  disease  may  affect  either  th«  joints,  In  which  casss  the  bones 
are  often  affected,  or  the  muscles  themselves.  What  is  known  as  Lumbago, 
in  which  the  back  and  hindquarters  are  affected,  and  the  dog  shows  evi- 
dences of  the  most  intense  pain,  being  barely  able  to  move,  and  drags  his 
hind  legs,  is  only  a  form  of  rheumatism. 

The  same  can  be  said  of  those  common  diseases  popularly  referred  to 
as  kennel  lameness,  or  chest-founder,  in  which  the  muscles  connecting  the 
shoulder  blade  to  the  chest  are  affected,  and  the  animal  is  very  stiff  and 
sore  In  front,  particularly  noticeable  when  running  down  hill. 

The  cause  of  rheumatism  is  a  poisonous  acid  in  the  blood,  and  this 
acid  is  produced  and  induced  by  a  bad  diet,  exposure  to  cold  winds,  damp- 
ness, eeneral  neglect  and  exposures. 

Svmntoms. — Pa;n,  stiffness,  soreness,  disordered  stomach,  difficulty  in 
movlnar.  more  or  less  fever,  anxiety,  and  in  some  cases — swelling  of  the  joint. 
Tn^i  (lire-iso  piqo  sh*ft3  from  one  location  to  another,  or  may  disappear  for 
a  day  to  reappear  the  next  with   increased  severity. 

Treatment. — Give   the  ftnlmal   warm,   comfortable   Quarters,   and   la 


DISEASES  135 

most  eases  a  warm  bath  will  give  relief,  using  care  to  see  that  the  animal  is 
carefully  and  thoroughly  dried  after  bath.  If  it  is  still  in  great  pain  give 
a  dose  of  Dover's  Powders,  and  if  necessary,  open  the  bowels  with  one 
dose  of  the  following: 

Class  1. —  (Adult  dogs,  5  to  12  lbs.) — Olive  oil,  one  teaspoonful;  cascara 
sagrada,  fluid  ext.,  3  to  10  drops. 

Class  2. —  (Adult  dogs,  12  to  20  lbs.)— Olive  oil,  one  tablespoonful; 
cascara  sagrada,  fluid  ext.,   10   to  15  drops. 

Class  3. —  (Adult  dogs,  20  to  40  lbs.) — Olive  oil,  one  ounce;  cascara 
sagrada,  fluid  ext.,  15  to  30  drops. 

Class  4. —  (Adult  dogs,  40  lbs.  and  over.) — Olive  oil,  one  or  two  ounces; 
cascara  sagrada,  fluid  ext.,  30  to  60  drops. 

The  above  doses  are  for  a  purgative  action.  As  a  gentle  laxative  give 
one-half  the  above  doses  morning  and  evening.  Puppies,  two  months  old, 
of  Classes  2,  3  and  4,  take  half  dose  of  Class  No.  1,  and  for  puppies  three 
to  six  months  old  give  them  as  a  dose  half  of  Class  No.  2. 

These  two  drugs  are  both  so  gentle  and  harmless  that  no  danger  fol- 
lows their  use.  A  pup  six  months  old  can  take  nearly  as  much  medicine  as 
an  adult,  while,  for  instance,  a  two  month  old  fox  terrier  will  take  nearly 
as  much  at  a  dose  as  would  a  mastiff  or  Great  Dane  of  same  age. 

After  having  given  above,  now. treat  patient  with  following  three  times 
a  day: 

Class  1.- — (Adult  dogs,  10  to  20  lbs.) — Salicylate  of  sodium,  3  grains; 
quinine,  1  grain;  plienacetin,  1  grain. 

Class  2.— (Adult  dogs,  20  to  40  lbs.)— Salicylate' of  sodium,  10  grains; 
quinine,  2  grains;   plienacetin.  3  grains. 

Class  3. —  (Adult  dogs.  40  up  to  150  lbs.) — Salicylate  of  sodium,  15 
grains;   quinine,   3  grains;  phenacetin,  '5  grains. 

Not  generally  used  for  pups  under  five  months,  but  from  five  up  to 
ten  month- pups  use  one-half  above  doses;  over  ten  months,  dogs  of  breeds 
of  first  two  classes  take  an  adult  dose. 

In  some  cases  it  is  advisable  to  use  a  liniment.  The  best  one  for  this 
purpose  is  a  combination  of  compound  camphor  liniment,  four  ounces;  and 
aconite  liniment,  two  ounces.  Rub  it  well  into  the  affected  parts  for  at 
least  half  an  hour,  then  wipe  dry  and  muzzel  the  an'mal  for  a  while,  to 
prevent  his  licking  himself,  as  this  liniment  is  a  powerful  poison.  If  the 
joints  are  very  severely  affected,  after  applying  the  liniment,  wrap  them 
up  in  cotton  wool. 

Feed  light,  easily  digested  foods;  vegetable  soups  with  boiled  rice, 
oatmeal    or   corn   mush. 

Here  are  a  couple  of  cases  that  were  prescribed  for:  "I  have  a  dog,  four 
years  old,  that  seems  to  be  affected  in  a  peculiar  manner.  He  seems  stiff 
all  over  his  body.  On  the  slightest  exertion  he  shows  great  pain,  and  by 
simply  touching  him  it  seems  to  make  him  howl,  and  cry  dreadfullv.  He 
has  been  showine  this  now  for  a  month  or  six  week?  "-A  -1-"'*  ^eem  to  be 
improving.  Sometimes  when  he  ents  it  is  almost  impo--'1  le  for  him  to 
move  his  head  up  or  down.  I  should  be  pleased  to  hear  from  you.  An*  — 
Yonr  dog  has  muscular  rheumatism,  and  I  would  suggest  the  following 
treatment:  Gire  interally  tincture  coleMmm  'n  15  dron  doses  three  times 
dally.     There  tare  been  »  number  of  anti-rheumatic  agents  recommended 


136  DISEASES  """* 

for  affections  of  this  kind,  but  so  far  some  of  them  have  not  proved  to  he 
of  much  benefit.  Also,  in  connection  with  the  above  treatment  it  would 
be  well  to  use  some  stimulating  embrocation,  rubbing  into  the  skin  thor- 
oughly with  a  woolen  cloth.  This  should  be  used  once  daily.  Spirits  of  cam- 
phor might  be  tried,  or  the  aconite  and  camphor  liniment  prescribed  by 
Dent — the  poisonous  one." 

"Please  prescribe  for  a  dog,  one  hundred  and  fifty  pounds  weight,  that 
has  a  bad  case  of  rheumatism  in  the  stifle  joint,  the  third  attack  in  the  same 
joint.  He  has  had  it  now  for  several  weeks  and  is  just  beginning  to  walk 
on  that  leg  very  stiffly;  cannot  put  it  down  when  running.  I  am  afraid 
Ihe  joint  will  be  permanently  stiffened.  Advise  me  as  to  treatment,  exer- 
cise  and  feeding.  Ans. — Give  ten  grains  of  the.  salicylate  of  soda  and  two 
grains  of  quinine  three  times  a  day,  hand  rub  the  joint  gently  three  times 
a  clay  twenty  minutes  at  a  time;  feed  milk  and  stale  bread  and  a  very 
little  meat;  keep  in  warm  quarters  and  do  not  expose  to  the  weather;  give 
walking  exercise  on  pleasant  days  only." 

Ribs,  Fracture  of. — This  injury,  which  is  not  uncommon  in  dogs,  is 
usually  due  to  a  kick.  The  symptoms  are  pain  on  manipulating  the  part, 
the  breathing  is  short,  the  ribs  are  more  or  less  fixed,  and  crepitus  can 
be  heard  if  the  ear  is  applied  to  the  ribs.  The  ribs  should  be  bandaged 
rather  tightly,  to  prevent  undue  expansion  of  the  chest  walls,  and  this  will 
generally  effect  a  cure,  if,  however,  the  lungs  are  injured,  then  such  com- 
plications as  pneumonia  or  pleurisy  may  arise.  A  mild  aperient  is  always 
beneficial. 

Ringworm. — Dogs  occasionally  have  this,  due  to  a  vegetable  parasite. 
It  is  a  round,  scaly  patch,  very  contagious,  and  also  due  to  dirty,  damp 
kennels,  but  could  be  communicated  to  the  dog  from  a  child  who  was  playing 
with  it.  The  best  treatment  is  a  little  of  the  ointment  of  iodide  of  iron, 
well  rubbed  in  twice  a  day,  prepared  as  follows:  1  dram  of  iodide  of  iron 
to  7  drams  of  spermaceti  ointment;  mix.  My  Skin  Cure  will  also  cure 
this  trouble.  Another  remedy  is  yellow  oxide  of  mercury,  15  grains,  and 
benzoated  lard,  1  ounce.  Another  is  oleate  of  copper,  one  part  to  lard  four 
parts,  which  will  cure  it  up. 

Rickets. — Dalziel  says  of  Rickets: 

"Pups,  the  offspring  of  an  enfeebled  clam  yielding  an  insufficient 
supply  of  milk,  and  that  of  poor  quality,  or  those  that  are,  from  any  cause, 
ill  fed  and  neglected  or  kept  in  close,  ill-ventilated  places,  without  a  chance 
of  fresh  air  and  needful  exercise,  suffer  from  mis-shapen  limbs,  thick  joints 
and  other  deformities,  caused  by  the  bones  being  imperfectly  developed, 
the  food,  and  other  conditions  on  which  the  pup  is  reared,  not  yielding 
the  constituents  necessary  to  give  them  the  required  hardness  to  enable 
them  to  perform  their  proper  functions.  This  state  is  known  as  rickets, 
and  the  cause  being  plain,  the  treatment  is  evident.  Continuous  in-and-in 
breeding  is  one  cause  of  rickets. 

"Do  not  attempt  to  rear  a  pup  on  a  weakly,  unhealthy  mother,  but  if 
tbe  breed  Is  desired,  procure  for  the  pups  a  fostor-motner  of  undoubted 


' "~         —  DISEASES  "  137 

health  and  stamina;  let  the  nest  be  in  a  warm,  airy  place,  and  as  soon 
as  the  pups  are  able  to  leave  the  nest  let  them  have  plenty  of  room,  fresh 
air,  warmth,  and  sunshine,  if  possible,  and  insure  thorough  cleanliness 
of  the  place  in  which  they  are  kept.  When  old  enough  to  eat,  let  their  diet 
bo  light,  nourishing  and  digestible,  and  rickets  will  be  avoided.  In  cases 
where  rickets  already  exist  attend  to  the  above  suggestions;  let  a  con- 
.  siderable  portion  of  the  diet  consist  of  good  milk,  to  which  add  a  little 
lime  water,  say  a  tablespoonful  to  every  quarter  pint,  and  give  in  the  food 
small  doses  of  cod  liver  oil  twice  a  day  for  some  months." 

The  following  is  from  "Notes  for  Novices,"  published  in  the  American 
Stockkeeper: 

"A  great  deal  has  been  said  and  written  on  the  subject  of  rickets  in 
puppies.  In  a  great  many  cases  the  trouble  is  brought  on  by  allowing 
them  to  play  and  roll  about  at  an  early  age  on  a  brick  floor.  If  it  is 
r.fressary  to  keep  puppies  in  a  house  with  brick  floor  it  should  be  covered 
©ver  with  movable  boards,  under  which  is  a  layer  of  disinfected  sawdust, 
so  a^   to  prevent  the  propagation   of  insects. 

"As  an  internal  remedy  for  puppies  which  are  rickety,  nothing  is  much 
better  than  Parrish's  Chemical  Food,  which  contains  iron  and  other  phos- 
phates and  must  improve  the  state  of  the  bone  system.  Cod  liver  oil  emul- 
sion with  hypophosphites  is  also  excellent,  and  alternate  doses  of  each 
may  be  given  with  benefit. 

"The  use  of  liniments  depend  on  circumstances.  If  the  leg  weakness  is 
caused  by  the  puppy  having  been  kept  on  a  brick  floor,  as  suggested,  it  is 
possible  to  put  matters  all  right  again  by  the  use  of  liniment  only.  But 
if  due  to  phvsical  weakness,  less  Will  depend  upon  external  application 
than  upon  internal  remedies  given,  and  general  dieting  and  management. 
As  a  good  all-round  liniment  there  is  nothing  better  than  ordinary  hartshorn 
and  oil  liniment,  with  a  liberal  allowance  of  turpentine." 

Dent  prescribes  as   follows: 

"What  is  the  matter  with  my  St.  Bernard  puppy,  six  months  old?  H« 
walks  like  a  person  would  with  rheumatism;  it  all  seems  to  be  in  his 
forelegs;  he  followed  my  buggy  one  day  and  got  very  warm,  and  then  got 
very  wet.  He  is  quite  large  and  fleshy,  weight  one  hundred  and  ten  pounds? 
Ans. — Rickets;  give  him  a  dessertspoonful  of  precipitated  phosphate  of  lime 
in  his  food  three  times  a  day!  also  feed  him  four  ounces  of  lean  beef 
daily,  and  egg  shells  finely  broken  up  and  mixed  in  with  his  soft  food." 

The  following  was  published  in  Field  and  Fancy,  in  reply  to  request 
from  a  subscriber — written  by  Dr.  O.  V.  Brumley,  Professor  of  Canine 
Diseases  of  the  College  of  Veterinary  Department,  State  University  of  Ohio: 

"What  is  the  cause  of  rickets?  I  have  two  puppies  that  have  rickets 
now,  are  quite  valuable  ones,  and  would  like  to  save  them  if  possible.  They 
first  commenced  to  show  evidences  of  the  disease  about  two  months  ago, 
and  now  one  of  them  has  peculiar  enlargements  around  the  joints  on  the 
front  limbs,  also  on  its  face,  which  gives  it  a  very  peculiar  appearance.  The 
other  one  is  not  quite  so  bad  yet,  but  seems  to  be  getting  worse  all  the 
time.      Could  you  suggest  anything  that  would  help  them? 

"There  has  been  a  great  many  theories  advanced  in  regard  to  the 
cause  of  this  disease,  and  in  many  instances  they  do  not  seem  to  be  en- 


13S  x        DISEASES 

tirely  satisfactory.  Among  the  many  things  that  have  been  mentioned  an 
the  cause  of  rhachitis,  the  following  will  suffice  at  this  time:  A  deficiency  of 
lime-salts  as  a  consequence  of  disturbances  of  digestion;  excessive  forma- 
tion of  carbonic  acid  or  lactic  acid,  which  would  dissolve  the  lime-salts;  an 
alteration  of  the  general  nutritive  condition  on  account  of  abnormal  influ- 
ences in  young  animals;  enlargement  and  an  increase  in  the  number  and 
size  of  blood  vessels  in  the  bone  tissues,  so  that  the  lime-salts  continue  to 
circulate  in  the  blood  instead  of  being  deposited  in  the  bones.  It  might 
be  well  to  mention  that  at  the  present  time  the  exact  cause  of  this  disease 
is  not  known,  but  we  do  know,  however,  that  rickets  can  be  developed  in 
the  dog  by  deficient,  improper  food,  by  want  of  nitrogenous  food,  and  espe- 
cially bones,  as  it  has  been  demonstrated  that  animals  with  this  disease  if 
given  these  articles  of  diet  seem  to  improve  in-  a  short  time.  This  disease 
generally  makes  its  appearance  in  young  animals  in  the  first  few  months 
of  their  lives,  and  for  this  reason  also  it  is  very  often  spoken  of  as  heredi- 
tary. The  disease  seems  to  develop  relatively  in  proportion  to  their  growth; 
if  the  animal  grows  quickly,  the  disease  will  appear  quicKly,  if  growth  is 
slow,   the  disease  will  come  on  gradually. 

SPECIAL.  EXPERIMENTAL  TO  PROVE  THE  MENDELIAN  LAWS. 


In  calling  the  attention  of  our  readers  to  the  advertisement  of  the 
STERLING  COLLIE  KENNELS  we  do  so  with  special  pleasure  because  of 
the  personal  knowledge  that  we  have  of  the  kennel  and  owner.  The 
STERLING  COLLIE  KENNELS  has  been  in  existence  for  the  past  six  years 
and  has  held  a  pronent  place  in  the  breeding  and  exhibiting  of  collies  in 
this  country.  Just  now  this  kennel  doing  some  special  experimental  breed- 
ing work,  endeavoring  to  prove  the  Mendelian  laws  of  heridity  on  their 
collies,  with  the  result  that  dogs  of  a  fixed  type  and  color  are  being  pro- 
duced with  a  degree  of  certainty  that  we  have  not  heard  of  before  and  much 
good  is  being  done  for  the  breed.  Get  in  touch  with  this  kennel  If  you  are 
interested  in  collies. 

"This  disease  is  a  peculiar  disturbance  of  the  bones  of  the  whole 
System,  and  seems  to  be  a  deficiency  of  lime-salts  in  the  bones,  making 
them  solft  and  flexible.  The  bones  become  soft  enough  so  that  they  can 
be  cut  easily  with  a  knife,  and  the  ends  of  the  bones  become  much  thick- 
ened, which  accounts  for  the  peculiar  enlargements  mentioned  abor«. 
It  is  very  often  that  the  enlargements  make  their  appearance  on  the  bones 
of  the  face,  which  gives  the  animal  that  peculiar  expression.  Deformed 
and  distorted  bones  are  very  frequent  occurrences  in  this  disease,  especially 
noticeable  in  the  limbs,  which  no  doubt  comes  from  the  weight  of  the 
animal  at  the  time  the  bones  are  soft.  The  disease  as  a  rule  is  chronic,  and  it 
takes  a  long  course  of  treatment  to  bring  them  to  a  normal  condition 
again,  and  very  often  the  treatment  is  not  satisfactory.  I  have  in  mind  a 
case  now  that  entirely  recovered  from  the  disease,  but  it  was  a  mild  one,  and 
was  treated  before  the  bones  were  much  deformed.  If  the  disease  is  taken 
early,  it  may  be  checked  by  means  of  proper  feding;  but  when  the  de- 
formity is  once  formed,  it  is  only  in  extremely  rare  cases  that  it  does  not 


STERLING  COLLIE  KENNELS 

(REGISTERED) 

STERLING  IN  NAME  AND  QUALITY 


SCIENTIFIC    BREEDING 

In  breeding  animals,  practically 
any  desired  result  can  be  obtain- 
ed if  the  facts  and  factors  in- 
volved, are  known.  I  am  breed- 
ing collies  scientifically — to  get 
them  true  to  type,  color  and  mark- 
ings. In  my  effort  to  solve  the 
problem  of  color  inheritance  I  am 
using  white,  sable,  blue  and  tri- 
color collies.  You  can  help  by 
sending  me  reports  of  the  off- 
spring of  registered  matings  in- 
volving their  use. 


INTERNATIONAL  CHAMPION 
PARBOLD  PICAROON 


(S 


K 
U 

0) 


(S 


STERLING  COLLIES 


Are  known  the  world  over  for  their 
STERLING  type  and  qualities.  We 
breed  them,  show  them  and  sell  them. 
Our  stud  dogs  are  the  best  to  be  had 
in  either  country.  Our  product  is  the 
best  that  money  can  buy.  Send  for 
circular   giving    full   information. 

A  STERLING  CHAMPION 

Edwin  L,  PicKiiardt,  Prop. 
219  UNIVERSITY  HALL,  MADISON,  WISCONSIN. 


140  DISEASES 

show   as    the   animal    grows    to    an    adult   age.      It   very    frequently    leaves 
them   'bowlegged,'   or  with   twisted  limbs. 

"I  would  suggest  that  you  feed  plenty  of  nitrogenous  food,  such  as 
meat,  and  encourage  digestion  as  much  as  possible.  Give  bones,  and  per- 
haps it  would  be  well  to  give  small  amount  of  lime  water  to  drink.  In  the 
medicinal  treatment  use  syrups  calci  locto-phosphatis,  in  thirty  drop 
doses,  once  daily." 

Septicemia  Puerperalis,  and  Inflammation  of  the  Uterus. — "This  is 
common  in  bitches,  and  is  the  result  of  retention  and  putrefaction  of  a 
dead  fetus  (pup,)  or  the  introduction  of  putrid  matter  through  the  blood 
stream.  The  symptoms  are  high  fever,  the  nose  and  mouth  are  hot,  the 
pulse  is  quick,  the  respirations  are  increased,  the  eyes  are  injected,  the  ex- 
tremities become  cold,  and  often  insensibility  and  death  occur. 

"If  the  treatment  is  to  be  of  any  avail  it  must  be  adopted  at  once. 
First,  remove  the  cause,  if  possible,  inject  the  uterus  with  warm,  weak 
Gondy's  Fluid,  and  give  immediately  10  grains  to  20  grains  of  the  hypo- 
sulphite of  soda,  in  water  three  times  a  day.  Creasote  given  in  1  grain  to 
3  grain  doses  (made  into  a  pill  with  a  crumb  of  bread),  three  times  a 
day  is  useful;  salicylate  of  soda  is  also  recommended  in  10  grains  to  0 
grains  doses,  in  water,  three  times  a  day.  The  bowels  must  be  relaxed  by 
means  of  doses  of  oil,  and  soap  and  water  enemas.  The  kennel  must  be 
thoroughly  cleansed  and  sanitary,  the  drains  well  flushed  and  a  good  clean 
bed  provided.  The  patient  must  have  warmth  with  plenty  of  fresh  air.  The 
food  must  be  light,  such  as  beef  tea  and  mutton  broth,  with  crumbled  stale 
bread.  As  the  animal  approaches  convalescence,  1  grain  to  2  grains  of 
sulphate  of  quinine  may  be  given  with  advantage." 

The  above  is  Dalziel's  treatment.  In  lieu  of  the  quinine  during  con- 
valescence I  would  use  Clayton's,  Sergeant's  or  Dent's  Condition  Pills. 

Sarcoptie  Mange. — See   Mange. 

Scalds — See  Burns. 

Scurf,  or  Crusty  Ears — This  comes  from  want  of  attention  to  the  skin, 
but  often  appears  on  the  ears  as  a  forerunner  of  canker,  in  which  case  wash 
with  warm  water  and  anoint  with  olive  oil.  Give  the  dog  a  dose  of  physic, 
and  feed  on  a  light  diet  for  a  few  days.  If  you  will  put  my  Skin  Cure 
on  these  crusty  ears  twice  a  day,  rub  on  well  both  sides,  which  softens  up 
the  crusty  and  scaly  edges  and  flaps  of  the  ear.  then  gently  scrape  off  what  is 
loosened,  with  your  fingers — in  a  few  days  the  ears  will  be  cured.  This 
is  my  treatment,  and  it  always  works.  The  fact  of  the  matter  is  that  my 
Skin  Cure,  containing  nine  ingredients,  carefully  blended  and  mixed,  will 
just  about  take  proper  care  of  any  skin  trouble  that  a  dog  has.  Each 
eight  ounce  bottle  is  mixed  and  prepared,  just  the  one  at  a  time,  this 
be-ng  necessary  in  order  to  get  the  different  ingredients  properly  blended, 
and  connot  be  made  in  bulk.  It.  sells  for  the  same  price  as  any  other  skin 
remedy  but.  with  all  due  regard  to  the  virtues  of  Glover's,  Gent's,  Clay- 
ton's and  Spratt's — which  are  all  good—mine  is  just  simply  better.     I've 


DISEASES  141 

used  all  the  others,  and  they  do  the  work,  if  used  as  per  directions,  but 
— I  like  my  own  the  best.  The  price  is  Fifty  Cents  for  full  eight  ounce 
bottle,  and  can  only  go  by  express. 

Salivation  is  caused  by  administration  of  overdoses  of  medicines  in 
which  mercury  figures.  Mercurial  salts  are  in  many  skin  remedies — a  great 
mistake — as  the  mercury  will  absorb  through  the  skin.  Symptoms  of  mer- 
curial poisoning  are  increased  salivation,  gums  swollen  and  spongy,  that 
bleed  at  the  slightest  touch,  surrounded  with  a  bluish  rim,  external  fetid 
breath,  loose  teeth,  furred  tongue,  intense  thirst,  ulceration,  loss  of  oppe- 
tite,  and  sloughing  off  of  the  gums.  If  the  dog  has  had  a  large  dose,  or 
frequent  doses  have  accumulated  in  the  system,  the  stomach  and  intestines 
have  become  involved,  causing  obstinate  vomiting  and  dysentery;  the 
dog  loses  flesh  rapidly,  eruptions  occur,  the  hair  drops  off,  teeth  fall  out, 
and  aparlysis  and  death  the  result.  Symptoms  must  be  treated  as  they 
occur,  kidneys  and  bowels  operated  upon,  while  the  patient's  strength  must 
be  kept  up  by  stimulants  and  food,  in  serious  cases  you  must  force  food 
into  them — beef  tea  is  a  good  thing  and  most  eisily  given — a  little  at  a 
tiine,  but  quite  often. 

Surfiet. — See  Blotch  and   Eczema. 

Scrofula. — Dogs  have  this  disease,  but  fortunately  not  very  often.  It 
happens  oftener  in  young  dogs,  being  inherited,  or  due  to  in-breeding. 
Symptoms  are  a  general  unhealthy  and  unthrifty  condition,  the  coat  having  a 
rough,  dull  look  and  an  offensive  odor.  The  lymphatic  glands  swell,  eyes 
have  a  chronic,  whitish  discharge,  appetite  irregular,  and  the  dog's  health 
is  hardly  two  days  alike.  The  symptoms  become  chronic  as  the  dog  grow* 
older,  and  the  abdomen  pendulous.  No  dog  having  scrofula  should  ever  bo 
used  for  breeding. 

Although  scrofula  can  not  be  cured,  to  keep  it  in  check,  strict  clean- 
liness should  be  observed,  both  as  regards  the  dog  itself  and  its  habitation. 
The  animal  should  be  groomed  daily,  as  this  tends  to  produce  a  healthier 
action  of  the  skin,  have  plenty  of  exercise  and  fresh  air,  and  be  frequently 
washed  with  Eberhart's  Dog  Soap,  and  Clayton's  Blood  Pills  be  used  for 
a  course  of  treatment,  they  working  on  and  purifying  the  blood 

Scrotal  Irritation, — This  is  met  with  in  dogs  used  constantly  for  stud 
purposes.  The  scrotum  becomes  red,  spots  appear,  discharging  serum  and 
irritation  is  severe.  The  part  finally  becomes  swollen,  very  sore,  the  dis- 
charge drying  forms  scabs,  wh.ch  come  off,  leaving  sore  patches,  and  gran- 
ulation is  very  likely  to  appear.  On  the  first  appearance  of  any  irritation 
bathe  parts  with  warm  water  and  administer  a  mild  aperient.  After  you 
have  well  dried  the  parts,  dress  morning  and  night  with  boracic  ointment, 
and  put  muzzle  on  dog  to  prevent  his  licking  it  off.  If  granulations  exist 
touch  with  nitrate  of  silver.  If  the  trouble  recurs,  as  it  often  does,  repeat 
the  treatment. 

St.  Vitus  Dance. — See  Chorea. 


142  DISEASES 

Sprains. — By  this  you  will  understand,  as  meant,  a  sudden,  violent 
straining  of  a  tendon,  or  ligament,  caused  by  extreme  or  long-continued 
exertion,  stepping  on  something,  or  by  getting  his  foot  into  &  hole  while  run- 
ning, causing  a  twist  of  limb  or  body  from  the  natural  position.  Sudden 
and  severe  pain  is  followed  by  inflammation.  You  can  discover  the  exact 
seat  of  the  injury  by  passing  the  hand  over  the  back,  shoulder,  or  limb 
which  seems  to  be  affected.  '  Rest  is  necessary  and  advisable  in  such  cases, 
and  also  to  give  a  cooling  aperient,  such  as  the  "Mild  Purgative." 

Syrup   of   buckthorn    3   parts 

Syrup  of  white  poppies    1   part 

Castor  oil    -    &   parts 

Dose  for   15   lb.   to   20   lb.   dog   is  a   tablespoonful;    larger  dogs   two 
tablespoonfuls  as  a  dose.     Shake  bottle  well 

As  soon  as  possible  bathe  with  water  as  warm  as  the  dog  can  bear 
it,  and  then  rub  the  part  with  Liniment  for  Sprains,  Bruises,  etc.,  at  least 
three  times  a  day. 

Stomach,  Inflammation  of  (Gastritis) — This  comes  from  a  number  of 
causes;  irritants  accidentally  swallowed,  sometimes  by  mineral  or  other 
poisons  carelessly  thrown  out  by  those  who  have  used  them  for  poisoning 
rats.  The  use  of  areca  nut  of  turpentine  will  cause  inflammation.  The 
dog  may  have  accidentally  swallowed  something  of  an  irritating  nature  while 
helping  himself  from  the  garbage  barrel,  as  many  clogs  will  do. 

The  Symptoms  are  excessive  thirst  and  violent  vomiting,  and  between 
these  the  dog  will  lie  on  his  side,  stretched  out,  whining  and  moaning  from 
the  pain  he  is  suffering.  When  this  is  observed  administer  from  Vi  grain 
to   V2  grain  of  hydrochlorate  of  cocaine. 

Treatment. — Keep  the  dog  undisturbed,  with  a  constant  supply  of  water 
that  has  been  boiled,  within  reach,  and  give  him  mutton  broth  made  with 
barley  and  a  little  isinglass  added  to  it.  To  allay  the  pain  a  very  little 
opium  may  be  given.  Less  medicine  in  such  a  case  is  the  better  plan  to 
follow.  If  diarrhea  should  follow,  which  is  very  likely,  this  must  be  treated 
as  directed  under  that  head. 

Sunstroke. — This  sometimes  happens  to  dogs,  the  same  as  to  people, 
but  not  often,  and  generally  not  to  a  dog  rightly  cared  for  by  its  owner, 
but  to  the  unfortunate  ones  who  have  no  owner,  the  poor  fellows  you  so 
often  see — homeless  and  friendless — on  the  streets,  many  such  I  see,  and 
while  they  lack  pedigree,  yet  they  are  dogs,  and  should  find  some  one 
who  would  be  good  enough  to  give  them  a  home,  which  all  dogs  deserve. 
I  have  now  in  my  kennel  one  dog — which  I  call  "Tramp" — that  I  found, 
and  while  he  has  no  pedigree  and  I  could  not  even  tell  you  what  breed 
he  is,  yet  "Tramp"  shows  me  every  day  by  his  actions,  his  intelligence,  and 
his  so  plainly  show  of  affection  for  me — that,  while  he  is  not  worth  ten 
cents,  yet  he  will  find  a  good  home,  and  just  as  good  treatment  as  the 
finest  bulldog  or  pug  that  I  own,  and  just  as  long  as  he  lives,  unless  I  can 
find  someone  to  whom  I  can  give  him,  and  who  will  treat  and  care  for  him 
as  he  deserves.     If  you,  my  reader,  as  you  will — run  across  a  homeless  dog 


DISEASES  143 

— give  him  a  home,  even  if  you  could  not  tell  what  breed  he  is.  He  or  she 
would  fully  repay  you  for  this  kind  act,  and  the  Good  Master  above  will 
reward  you  for  it.  Every  dog  you  see  or  meet  deserves  all  of  this.  My 
finally  dragging  his  hind  legs.  When  placed  upon  their  legs  they  drop 
motto  is,  "You  can't  do  too  much  for  a  dog."  I  have  wandered  from  my 
subject — Sunstroke.  Treat  it  as  you  would  a  person.  Remove  the  dog 
quickly  to  some  retired  place,  as  cool  as  possible,  where  he  can  get  plenty 
of  air,  and  apply  ice  to  the  head.  If  ice  is  not  obtainable,  cold  water 
plentifully  applied  is  the  next  best  thing  to  do.     Also  give  a  little  whisky. 

Spinal  Meningitis. — The  cause  of  this  disease  may  be  traced  to  injur- 
ies to  the  spine,  violent  blows,  shocks,  falls  from  windows,  etc. 

Occasionally  we  see  this  symptom  in  distemper. 

The  symptoms  appear  slowly  or  quickly,  according  to  the  irritation 
present.  If  the  spinal  cord  is  much  involved  by  the  exudation,  we  find 
complete  paralysis,   posterior  to   that  portion   of  the  spine  affected. 

Symptoms. — The  patient  is  heavy  and  dull,  with  a  staggering  gait, 
sideways  on  their  hind  quarters.  If  the  paralysis  is  complete,  we  must  look 
for  the  injury  in  the  cervical  region  (or  region  of  the  neck).  If  a  pin  be 
used  to  the  paralyzed  members  there  is  usually  no  sensitiveness.  Coldness 
is  another  symptom.  There  is  often  complete  paralysis  or  loss  of  power 
to  control  the  urine,  and  there  is  a  difficulty  in  the  passage  of  faecal 
matter.     The  paralyzed  members  become  atrophied  from  want  of  use. 

Consciousness  is  not  at  all  impaired,  and  the  appetite  remains  fairly 
good. 

The  prognosis  is  usually  unfavorable,  and  when  recovery  does  take 
place  it  is  very  slow. 

Treatment  consists  in  counter-irritation  to  the  spine  as  biniodide  of 
mercury  or  mustard  oil,  and  strychnine  in  increasing  doses,  commencing 
with  1-50  grain  three  times  a  day,  increased  gradually  to  1-30.  Iodide  of 
potash  may  be  used  in  conjunction  with  the  strychnine.  Electricity  may 
be  tried. 

Temperature  and  PuLse — As  indications  of  health  or  departure  from 
the  normal  state  the  temperature  and  the  moisture  or  dryness  of  the  nose 
— the  integument  forming  the  walls  of  the  nostrils — are  very  delicate  indi- 
cators, but,  if  I  may  say  so,  they  tell  too  much,  and  are  too  general,  and 
do  not  enable  us  to  discriminate.  When  the  nose  is  dry  and  hot  we  know 
the  dog  is  out  of  sorts,  but  we  have  to  search  for  other  symptoms  to  deter- 
mine what  is  the  matter.  The  pulse  and  general  temperature  are  impor- 
tant aids  to  diagnosis  far  too  much  neglected.     Dalziel  says: 

"The  first  thing  a  medical  man  does  when  he  visits  a  patient  is  to  feel 
the  pulse,  and  if  there  is  a  suspicion  of  fever  of  any  kind,  the  temperature 
of  the  body  is  carefully  taken;  this  course,  if  followed  with  the  dog,  would 
assist  the  owner  in  treating  his  animal  in  all  inflammatory  and  febril  cases, 
such  as  distemper. 

"A  dog's  pulse  varies  from  90  to  100  beats  per  minute,  the  heart's 
action  being  quicker  in  highly  bred,  nervous  dogs,  as,  for  instance,  setters, 
pointers  and  bulldogs,  and  some  finely  bred  toys.     The  owner  should,  for 


144  •— -i DISEASES  .,-.—* 

this  reason,  become  familiar  with  the  temperature  of  his  dog  in  health 
so  that  he  may  be  able  to  at  once  detect  a  departure  from  the  normal 
state.  You  can  feel  the  pulse  inside  the  knee,  but  in  small  doga  It  ia 
better  to  count  the  heart  beats.  If  you  hold  the  left  fore-leg  up,  with 
elbow  slightly  bent,  the  point  of  it  will  indicate  the  place  where  the  hand 
should  be  held  flat  over  it. 

"The  temperature  is  gauged  by  inserting  an  ordinary  clinical  ther- 
mometer in  the  rectum  for  half  a  minute,  or  in  the  mouth  between  the 
lip  and  teeth,  although  the  latter  can  only  be  done  on  a  quiet  subject.  The 
temperature  of  the  dog  normally  varies  from  100  degrees  to  101  Fahren- 
heit. 

Tetanus. — See  Lockjaw. 

Testicles,  Enlarged. — When  this  occurs,  acute  pain  Is  in  most  casea 
present,  while  in  other  cases  it  seems  to  cause  but  little  if  any  inconven- 
ience. Dogs  past  the  middle  age  are  usually  the  subjects,  and  obesity  pre- 
disposes this  condition.  Dogs  which  have  not  been  allowed  to  be  bred  are 
also  so  affected,  but  it  occurs  quite  often  in  stud  dogs  as  well,  also  due  to 
injuries.  In  treating  such  cases  try  to  remove  the  cause  if  you  can  so 
ascertain.  If  pain  is  present,  hot  fomentations  should  be  applied  and  an 
aperient  given. 

Thorns These  are  most  liable  to  pierce  the  pads  of  the  foot  (the  aole). 

The  thorn  should  be  abstracted  at  once,  and  if  a  severe  case  of  inflamma- 
tion has  been  caused  bathe  or  poultice  the  foot. 

Tapeworm. — See  Worms. 

Tartar  on  the  Teeth. — See  Teeth,  Decayed. 

Tears. — See  Wounds.  1 

Teeth. — The  following  article  on  teeth  could  not  be  made  plainer  than 
by  what  Dalziel  says: 

"The  dog  has,  when  the  set  is  complete,  or  in  kennel  parlance,  when 
he  'has  a  full  mouth,'  forty-two  teeth,  made  up  of  twelve  inciaora,  or  cut- 
ting teeth,  four  canines  or  fangs,  and  twenty-six  molars,  double,  or  grind- 
ing teeth. 

"Some  of  these  constitute  what  are  ordinarily  called  the  milk  teeth, 
and  are  deciduous;  that  is  to  say,  they  are  after  a  few  niontha  cast,  and 
give  place  to  permanent  ones. 

"The  Incisors — six  above  and  six  below — form  the  front  teeth;  those 
In  the  upper  jaw  are  the  larger,  and  both  above  and  below  the  center  teeth 
are  the  smaller,  the  outer  or  corner  cutters  the  strongest;  these  appear 
at  the  age  of  from  four  to  five  weeks,  and  give  place  to  the  permanent  In- 
cisors at  three  to  four  months. 

"The  Canines  or  Fangs  also  make  their  appearance  when  the  pup  is 
from  four  to  six  weeks  old,  and  these  are  replaced  by  the  permanent  fangs 


MASSASOIT    KENNELS 

(Registered  with  American   Kennel  Club). 
FRED.  A.  BEARSE,   Owner.  ~ 

SPRINGFIELD,   MASS. 

Boston  Terriers 

We  always  have  for  sale  a  few 
choice  specimens  of  the  most 
fashionable  breeding.  Trices, 
$20  up. 

Mail  address  Box  195. 
KENNELS,  BOSTON    ROAD. 

The  photograph  to  the  right  is  of 

"FASCINATION," 

A.  K.  C.  107292 

Bred  and  owned  by 

FRED.    A.    BEARSE. 


High  Class  Black  and  Tan  Toy  Terriers 

HANS  KIRS    H,  NEW  ORLEANS,  LA. 

AT  STUD,  PRINCE  TESHI  H.,  JR.,  A.  K.  C. 
210886..     STUD    FEE,    $15.00. 

This  phenomenal  sire  stamps  his  progeny  with 
his  own  true  type.  High  class  puppies  oc- 
casionally for  sale. 

HAM:  RAISED  TOY  BLACK  AND  TAN  TOY 
TERRIERS  FIFTY  YEARS. 


MANGE,  ECZEMA 

Ear  Canher  and  Goitre 

CURED  OR  NO  CHARGE. 

WRITE  FOR  PARTICULARS  DESCRIBING  THE  TROUBLE. 

Eczema  Remedy  Co. 

HOT  SPRINGS,  ARK. 


146  DISEASES 

about  the  age  of  five  or  six  months;  they  are  considerably  elongated  and 
pointed;   the  upper  ones  are  the  stronger. 

"The  Molars. — Of  these,  twelve  are  in  the  upper  jaw  and  fourteen  in 
the  lower;  the  first  (that  is,  of  course,  the  four,  two  upper  and  two  under) 
are  not  deciduous,  and  make  their  appearance  at  about  three  or  four  months; 
the  second,  third  in  the  upper,  and  fourth  in  the  lower,  are,  like  the  in- 
cisors and  canines,  deciduous,  appearing  at  the  fourth  or  fifth  week,  and 
giving  place  to  the  permanent  ones  at  five  to  six  months;  the  fourth  in  the 
upper  jaw  is  much  the  strongest,  and  ,in  the  lower  jaw,  the  fifth  is  the 
largest  and  strongest.  The  fifth  generally  appears  from  the  fourth  to  the 
fifth  month,  and  in  the  lower  jaw  the  fifth  is  the  largest  and  strongest.  The 
sixth  at  the  age  of  from  five  to  six  months,  and  the  seventh  in  the  lower  jaw 
from  five  and  a  half  to  seven  months.  Most  of  the  molars,  in  the  lower  jaw 
from  five  and  a  half  to  seven  months.  Most  of  the  molars,  whilst  adapted 
for  grinding  or  crushing  bones,  etc.,  are  terminated  by  acute  lobes  suitable 
for  tearing  flesh. 

"Tartar  Accumulation  Upon  the  Teeth. — This  term  is  applied  to  those 
blackish  incrustations  so  commonly  found  adhering  around  the  necks  of  the 
teeth.  It  is  by  far  the  commonest  in  pet  dogs,  or  those  which  are  chiefly 
fed  upon  soft  food.  Sometimes  the  accumulation  of  matter  is  so  great  that 
it  causes  the  teeth  to  become  loose,  leads  to  ulceration  of  the  gums,  and 
the  production  of  a  most  offensive  smell  from  the  mouth,  all  of  which  can 
be  obviated  by  giving  the  animal  an  occasional  bone  to  pick.  The  treatment 
must  be  directed  to  the  removal  of  the  tartar  deposit.  This  can  be  done  by 
putting  on  a  simple  tape  muzzle  and  then  scraping  the  teeth  with  a  small 
instrument  which  is  sold  by  most  cutlers  for  the  purpose  of  scraping  the 
nails  of  the  human  subject.  It  is  a  somewhat  tedious  operation,  neverless 
extremely  simple. 

"Care  must  be  taken  to  prevent  the  gums  from  injury,  as  they  are  very 
soft,  and  bleed  upon  the  slightest  touch,  in.  many  cases.  All  loose  and 
decayed  teeth  should  be  pulled  out,  and  the  mouth  washed  occasionally  for 
several  days  with  some  cleansing  fluid,  such  as: 

Potash    alum     Vz    dram 

Borax Vz    dram 

Permanganate  of  potash 16        grains 

Water    4        ounces 

Directons. — Apply  to  the  teeth  with  a  brush. 

"The  dog  must  have  an  occasional  aperient,  i.  e.,  a  laxative  of  a  mild 
kind,  and  there  is  nothing  better  than  half  to  one  teaspoonful  of  liquid 
extract  of  cascara  bark  in  a  little  water. 

"Broken  Teeth. — The  teeth  are"  liable  to  injury  from  various  causes, 
such  as  result  from  biting  hard  substances,  like  stone,  etc.  Unless  they 
cause  inconvenience  through  sharp  projecting  points  lacerating  the  tongue, 
etc.,  or  imperfect  mastication  of  food,  they  are  best  left  alone.  In  old  dogs 
the  teeth  are  sometimes  worn  almost  away,  and  such  it  is  advisable  to  feed 
on  soft  food. 

"Displaced   Teeth, — The   permanent   teeth   may   be     displaced      either 


DISEASES  147 

through  a  temporary  tooth  not  having  been  shed,  or  by  an  excessive  ac- 
cumulation of  tartar.  If  caused  by  the  former,  this  should  be  extracted; 
the  latter  should  be  scaled  off  according  to  the  method  already  recom- 
mended.    Tooth  forceps  can  be  had  at  surgical  instrument  makers. 

"Caries,  or  Diseased  Teeth. — The  fangs  are  those  teeth  which  are  com' 
monly  affected.  One  or  more  of  the  teeth  appear  brown,  with  a  black  center, 
perhaps  coated  with  tartar,  and  loose.  The  breath  is  very  offensive,  and 
saliva  is  constantly  dribbling  from  the  mouth;  sometimes  swellings  under 
the  jaw.  The  sooner  the  decayed  tooth,  or  teeth,  is  removed,  the  better, 
followed  by  a  gentle  laxative,  and  Vxe  adoption  of  such  methods  as  will 
keep  the  system  in  good  working  order — viz.,  careful  dietary. 

"Abscess  of  the  Jaw. — A  decayed  tooth  may  give  rise  to  the  formation 
of  matter  below  the  jaw,  in  which  case  there  appears  a  soft  sort  of  tumor, 
swelling.     If  this  is  neglected,  a  fistulous  ulcer  may  remain. 

"In  some  cases  the  jaw-bone  itself  may  become  involved  in  the  dis- 
easer  state,  but  fortunately  this  is  rare.  The  gums  are  red,  swollen  and 
spongy.     The  breath  is  very  fetid  and  offensive. 

"The  term,  'canker  of  the  mouth,'  has  been,  and  still  is,  applied  to  this 
and  other  diseases  of  the  mouth. 

"The  treatment  consists  of  removing  the  diseased  tooth,  fomenting  the 
abscess  below  the  jaw  with  hot  water,  and,  when  ripe,  either  opening  it  with 
a  sharp  knife,  lancet,  or  allowing  it  to  burst  itself.  After  the  matter  has 
escaped,  it  should,  along  with  the  mouth,  be  washed  out  with  chloride  of 
zinc,  or  lead  lotion,  four  grains  to  every  ounce  of  water.  The  system  will 
require  good  support,  and,  it  may  be,  a  course  of  tonics,  such  as  a  grain  or 
two  of  quinine,  night  and  morning,  in  the  form  of  a  pill;  or,  using  one  of 
the  Condition  Pills  you  see  advertised  in  this  book — Clayton's,  Dent's,  or 
Sergeant's — they  are  all  good,  made  by  dogmen  for  dogs,  and  you  won't  go 
amiss  in  using  either  of  them  in  such  cases. 

"Teeth,  Decayed. — It  is  unfortunately  only  too  true  that  the  condition 
of  a  dog's  teeth  does  not  receive  the  attention  that  it  should;  this  is  very 
evident  when  it  is  borne  in  mind  that  one  of  the  most  important  functions 
of  the  teeth  is  mastication,  and  that  an  animal  cannot  maintain  good  health 
if  it  is  imperfectly  performed.  Upon  sound  teeth  greatly  depends  perfect 
mastication.  Before  assimilation  of  the  food  can  take  place  in  the  stomach 
it  must  be  received  into  that  organ  in  a  fit  condition  for  the  process,  and 
this  depends  upon  the  condition  of  the  teeth.  When  the  food  is  not  prop- 
erly chewed,  it  acts  as  an  irritant  to  the  stomach  and  bowels,  causing  indi- 
gestion and  diarrhea,  which  latter  in  puppies  often  proves  fatal. 

"Generally  speaking,  the  teeth  do  not  receive  any  attention  until  they 
decay,  and  cause  pain  or  stomach  trouble.  Preventative  measures  are  in 
my  experience  seldom  taken,  though  it  is  quite  as  necessary  for  a  dog  to 
have  clean  teeth  as  it  is  for  ourselves. 

"The  teeth  especially  require  attention  in  the  case  of  dogs  which  are 
fed  upon  an  unsuitable  diet,  as  they  become  furred,  and  finally  accumtila- 
tions  of  tartar  exist.  To  avoid  this  they  should  be  gone  over  once  a  day 
with  an  ordinary  toothbrush,  dipped  into  weak  Condy's  Fluid.  This-  will  not 
only  prevent  decay,  but  also  keeps  the  breath  sweet,  a  most  important  mat- 
ter where  the  dog  is  one's  constant  companion.  Fetid  breath,  however,  is 
not  always  due  to  the  teeth,  but  to  indigestion  as  a  result  of  their  condi- 


148  DISEASES 

tion;  at  times,  too,  especially  when  the  teeth  are  irregular,  food  accumu- 
lates between  them!  this  should  be  removed  with  the  brush.  That  dogs  are 
frequently  the  subject  of  toothache  cannot  be  doubted,  and  is  clearly  shown 
by  the  swelling  of  the  cheek,  and  often  by  the  formation  of  abscesses.  All 
decayed  teeth  that  are  past  preserving  should  be  extracted  by  a  competent 
person." 

Turnside. — The  dog  has  no  fit  in  this  disease,  but  walks  about  appar- 
ently without  an-  object,  generally  in  circles  and  always  in  one  direction. 
Youatt  ascribes  the  disease  to  the  presence  of  hytadids  in  the  brain,  but 
results  of  more  recent  study  of  animal  parasites  are  opposed  to  this  view. 
Worms  in  the  stomach  or  intestines  is  more  likely  to  be  the  cause.  Give 
the  dog  a  few  doses  of  Sure  Shot,  Glover's,  Dent's  or  Clayton's  Vermifugs. 
Also  put  the  dog  in  a  room  or  small  kennel  yard  where  he  can  not  injure 
himself  by  running  against  things,  as  he  might,  due  to  his  sight  being  im- 
paired. 

"Tumors. — These  are  divided  into  groups  of  varying  structure — Fi- 
brous, Fatty,  Calcareous,  Melanotic,  Osseous  and  Lacteal. 

"Fibrous  Tumors  are  usually  situated  in  the  jaw  or  limbs,  they  have  a 
firm  attachment  and  are  hard  and  insensible  to  the  touch.  Excision  is  ne- 
cessary. In  the  centre  of  these  tumors  a  cyst,  or  cavity,  containing  serum 
or  matter  (pus),  often  exists,  and  in  consequence  abscesses  form  upon 
their  surface. 

"Fatty  Tumors  are  commonly  met  with  in  the  dog,  and  have  no  particu- 
lar position,  but  occur  at  any  part  of  the  body.  They  are  smooth  and  shiny 
upon  their  surface,  unattached  to  the  surrounding  tissues,  they  seldom  be- 
come inflamed,  and  are  not  tender  when  touched.  The  treatment  is  by 
excision. 

"Calcareous  Tumors. — These  are  common  in  bitches,  and  are  usually 
situated  in  the  mammary  glands.  The  treatment  is  by  excision,  external 
applications  being  of  no  avail. 

"Melanotic  Tumors  are  seldom  seen  in  canine  practice.  There  are  a 
few  cases  on  record,  and  with  them  excision  has  been  successful. 

"Osseous  Tumors  are  likewise  rare  in  dogs,  and  when  occurring,  are 
invariably  associated  with  rickets;  their  situation  is  the  limbs. 

"Lacteal  Tumors  have  already  been  fully  dealt  with  under  that  head- 
ing." 

Tongue,  Inflammation  of  (Glossitis). — Dogs  are  extremely  liable  to 
Injuries  of  the  tongue,  which  is  not  surprising  when  we  consider  the  variety 
of  articles  they  pick  up — sharp  pieces  of  bone  or  stone.  In  some  instances 
the  inflammation  is  due  to  a  sting  (I  have  known  one  or  two  cases  of  this 
in  terriers,  while  the  teeth  sometimes  cause  lacerations. 

The  symptoms  are  first  an  increase  of  saliva,  the  jaws  are  moved  con- 
stantly, and  upon  examination  the  tongue  is  found  to  be  inflamed  and  ten- 
der, swallowing  is  performed  with  difficulty,  thirst  is  present,  or  at  least 
the  animal  finds  relief  in  continually  lapping,  although  probably  not  much 
!p  swallowed.     The  mouth  should  be  rinsed  out  frequently  throughout  the 


DISEASES  14» 

day  with  a  solution  of  boracic  acid  (1  scr.  of  the  acid  to  G  oz.  of  water). 
To  do  this,  hold  the  head  down  slightly,  pour  the  liquid  in  one  side,  and 
allow  it  to  run  out  of  the  other.  If  a  little  is  swallowed,  it  is  of  no  con- 
sequence. A  weak  solution  of  Condy's  Fluid  can  also  be  used  in  the  same 
way  with  marked  benefit.  This  treatment,  with  an  aperient,  is  usually  all 
that  is  necessary.  If  the  inflammation  is  due  to  injuries  caused  by  the 
teeth,  the  latter  must  have  attention;  they  may  require  extraction.  The 
food  must  consist  for  a  time  of  warm  milk  or  gravy.  Chicken  gravy  or 
made  from  giblets,  with  flour  added,  is  very  nourishing,  and  many  dogs 
that  are  sick  will  eat  this  when  refusing  everything  else.  Egg  and  milk  to 
lap  may  also  suit  them,  and  it  is  good. 

Tongue,  Paralysis  of. — Occasionally  seen  in  dogs,  and  often  congenital. 
The  tongue  protrudes,  becomes  dry  and  often  cracks.  The  dog  experiences 
little  inconvenience  and  laps  with  ease.  If  cracks  appear  on  the  tongue, 
apply  a  little  boracic  acid  ointment,  which  is  non-poisonous,  while  a  little 
sweet  oil  on  the  tongue  will  prevent  the  dryness.  A  nerve  tonic  should  be 
given,  5  to  20  drops,  as  per  sized  dog,  of  the  tincture  of  Nux  Vomica,  with 
Vz  grain  to  1  grain  of  quinine,  is  a  very  good  thing  to  use  now,  given  in 
water  twice  daily  after  food. 

Tongue,  Ulcers  on  the. — A  very  painful  condition,  usually  the  result  of 
neglect,  the  teeth  having  been  allowed  to  accumulate  tartar.  The  ulcers 
may  be  quite  rough  on  decayed  teeth,  or  to  a  disordered  stomach,  this  fre- 
quently the  cause.  In  this  case  give  an  aperient,  give  a  plain  diet,  and  in 
moderate  quantities,  and  when  the  condition  of  the  stomach  improves,  the 
ulcers  disappear.  Remove  the  tartar  by  scaling,  and  rub  the  teeth  after- 
wards with  a  tooth  brush  dipped  into  a  weak  solution  of  Condy's  Fuid. 
Extract  the  decayed  teeth  if  any.  Touch  the  ulcers  lightly  with  nitrate 
of  silver. 

Ticks  resemble  in  appearance  a  spider,  to  which,  in  fact,  they  are  re- 
lated, varying  in  size  from  a  pin's  head  to  a  small  pea.  The  tick  "fastens 
in  the  skin  by  means  of  its  legs, holding  on  with  as  much  tenacity  as  fre- 
quently to  part  in  two  in  the  attempt  to  remove  it.  They  are  less  common 
and  less  known  than  either  the  flea  or  louse.  The  color  of  the  smaller  ones 
is  a  light  grey,  but  become  dark  when  gorged  with  blood  from  the  dog. 
My  Skin  Cure  will  also  destroy  these  pests,  but  you  must  rub  it  in  well 
to  kill  them,  and  all  over  the  body.  In  using  it,  after  leaving  on  the  dog 
for  fifteen  minutes,  you  can  then  rinse  off  and  dry  the  dog,  thus  getting 
rid  of  the  greasy  condition  of  the  coat.  Ticks  occasionally  occur  even  in 
the  best  regulated  kennels,  as  it  is,  of  course,  impossible  to  prevent  a  dog 
sometimes  coming  in  contact  with  other  dogs  so  infected.  Once  ticks  make 
their  appearance  lose  no  time  in  ridding  the  dog  of  them. 

Warts  are  rather  common  on  the  dog,  occurring  on  the  lips,  ears,  in- 
side of  the  mouth,  and  appear  singly  or  in  clusters.  They  can  be  removed 
by  a  ligature  tied  tightly  around  the  root  as  close  to  the  skin  as  possible. 
Another  method  is  by  ft  scalpel,  the  blade  held  fiat  on  the  skin  at  the  root 


150 


DISEASES 


of  the  wart — cut  through — the  raw  surface  being  then  cauterized.  "The 
hot  iron  or  actual  cautery,  although  for  the  time  the  most  painful,  is  after 
all  (says  Dalziel)  the  best  and  safest."  Neither  potasse  fusse,  nitric  acid,  or 
nitrate  of  silver  can  be  safely  used,  because  the  dog's  tongue  would  surely 
sweep  the  injured  lip,  the  consequence  being  the  caustic  in  part  would  be 
transferred  to  the  tongue,  which  would  peel  as  the  result.  If 'used,  the  jaws 
must  be  so  tightly  bound  that  the  teeth  are  held  together,  so  the  tongue 
cannot  protrude. 

The  warts  often  grow  in  clusters,  and  the  difficulty  of  dealing  with 
them  then  is  greatly  increased.  An  application  of  bicarbonate  of  soda  has 
proved  effectual  in  some  cases. 


NORMACOT    WHITE    KING,    the    "American    Major    Mite," 

Premiership  Winner  of  England. 

Owner,   MELITA   KENNELS,    SEATTLE,   WASH. 


Worming;  the  Tongue. — A  silly  idea  that  may  still  exist  in  some  isolated 
nook  or  muddled  brain,  that  a  dog  has  a  worm  under  its  tongue,  the  re- 
moval of  which  is  called  "worming,!'  and  which  is  supposed  by  idiots  to  do 
great  good,  such  as  to  prevent  the  dog  from  biting,  should  he  ever  become 
mad?  Operation  consisted  in  cutting  the  bridle  of  the  tongue  and  pulling 
out  a  small  ligament,  which  contracts  and  curls  up  like  a  worm.  Anyone 
so  ignorant  should  have  the  same  operation  performed  on  their  own  tongue, 
to  see  how  cruel,  ridiculous  and  uncalled  for  is  such  an  idea.  Equally  as 
silly  is  a  similar  operation  as  to  removing  a  worm  from  the  tail  of  a  dog. 


Water  in  Chest. — See  Propsy. 


MELIf  A  KENNELS 

(REGISTERED) 
914  WEST  CROCKETT  ST.,  SEATTLE,  WASHINGTON. 

Western  Home  of  the  Pure  Maltese,  the  tiny  Snowdreams  of  Dogdom. 
Championship,  imported  breeding  stock  from  finest  blood  of  England. 

Owner  of  XORMACOT  CAMILLE,  only  brood  matron  daughter  in  America  of  MAJOR 
MITE,  premiership  winner  of  England,  and  only  Maltese  whelping  six  puppies  to  a  litter. 


Following  studs  at   service,  $50  each: — 
CH.   IMPY,    the    only    English    and    Inter- 
national  Champion   Maltese   in  America. 
NORMACOT   WHITE  KING,  the  "Ameri- 
can   Ma.'or    Mite."       Coat     measures     24 
inches    from    tip   to   tip. 


S.  NAMCR,  English  prize  winning  Mal- 
tese and  son  of  Ch.  8'.  Snow   King. 

MELITA  CUPID  (weight  4y2  lbs.),  big- 
gest American,  prize  winner  on  Pacific 
Coast.  Many  times  BEST  TOY  IN 
SHOW. 


MRS.  ANNA  R.  JVDD  and  some  of  her  famous  Maltese. 


152  -  ,^    ^i--?  DISEASES 

Wrenched  Back — Some  months  ago  a  party  wrote  me:  "My  dog  has 
wrenched  his  back  (by  jumping  off  a  high  table),  about  six  inches  from 
his  tail,  and  it  hurts  him  to  walk  up  the  steps.  He  gives  sharp  cries  of  pain 
quite  often  and  holds  his  hindquarters  on  a  droop." 

I  advised  as  follows,  and  the  dog  was  cured:  "Take  three  ordinary  cof- 
fee cups  of  water,  add  one  coffee  cup  each  of  strong  vinegar  and  salt. 
Heat  to  as  hot  as  you  can  just  stand  your  hand  in,  then  take  red  flannel 
cloth,  dip  in  this,  wring  out  and  lay  over  parts,  repeating  as  cloth  gets  cold, 
keeping  this  up  for  three  hours.  As  dog  gets  better  and  pain  leaves,  then 
use  a  soap  liniment  or  a  chloroform  liniment  that  your  druggist  can  fur- 
nish." 

Worms — All  dogs  are  born  with  worms;  some  few  get  through  without 
treatment,  like  some  children  do,  but  every  puppy  I  have  ever  bred  was 
treated  for  worms  at  from  six  to  eight  weeks  old,  or  as  soon  as  they  were 
weaned,  and  this  is  the  only  safe  and  sure  plan  to  follow,  for  you  make  no 
mistake  by  so  doing.  Worms  are,  without  doubt,  the  cause  of  the  death  of 
more  puppies,  in  various  ways,  than  from  all  other  diseases  combined,  de- 
stroying life  when  their  presence  is  not  suspected.  Except  in  rare  cases, 
they  do  not  do  much  damage  until  after  puppy  is  weaned,  when  they  get 
their  work  in,  and  I  hardly  ever  treat  for  worms  under  six,  and  generally 
not  until  they  are  eight  weeks  old,  or  just  after  being  weaned.  In  the  last 
two  years,  however,  I  have  had  puppies  show  signs  and  pass  worms  in  con- 
siderable quantities  as  young  as  three,  and  in  some  few  cases,  two  weeks 
old,  and  I  have  then  treated  them  with  small  doses  of  vermifuge,  but  they 
must  be  very  small  doses,  and  careful  in  what  you  use  at  this  age,  for  as  a 
rule,  very  little  medicine  should  be  given  to  a  puppy  before  it  is  weaned.  To 
be  safe  and  sure,  you  do  not  need  to  wait  for  the  usual  signs  of  worms  in 
puppies,  but  just  make  up  your  mind  to  the  fact  that  all  pups  are  born  with 
worms — and  you  won't  miss  it.  When  you  buy  a  puppy,  find  out  If  it  has 
been  treated;  if  not,  do  so  at  once,  for  you  can  be  sure  it  has  them,  and 
proper  remedies  are  now  made  that  are  perfectly  safe  to  use,  and  harmless 
should  puppy  not  have  any  worms. 

There  are  several  worm  remedies  made  for  dogs  that  are  safe  and  re- 
liable. When  I  have  to  give  puppies  treatment  for  worms  before  they  are 
weaned,  I  have  used  Clayton's  Vermifuge  in  small  doses,  and  with  good 
success,  (see  what  he  says  in  his  ad.  as  to  this),  and  also  "Vermilax,"  (see 
Vermilax  Co.'s  ad.  also).  Both  this  and  Clayton's  are  in  liquid  form,  and 
can  graduate  the  dose  easily.  As  some  remedies  are  put  up  in  capsules 
that  would  be  too  heavy  a  dose  for  puppies,  and  even  older  small  toy 
dogs.  An  overdose  might  not  kill  the  dog,  but  would  of  course  make  it 
sick.  I  also  use  "Sergeant's  Sure  Shot,"  and  have  for  years,  as  it  was  got- 
ten up  by  my  old  friend,  Polk  Miller.  It  is  put  up  in  liquid  form,  also  in 
capsules.  In  the  liquid  form  you  can  give  small  doses,  using  judgement 
as  to  age  and  breed.  I,  also  used  for  a  long  time,  Glover's  Vermifuge, 
and  it  is  an  old  and  reliable  remedy,  all  right  for  grown  dogs  and  larger 
breeds,  but  a  little  too  strong  for  puppies  and  toy  dogs,  unless  in  small  doses. 

There  are  several  remedies  advertised  as  quick  workers,  some  claiming 
"thirty  and  sixty  minute  results",  and  I  am  afraid  this  Is  too  quick  to  be 


DISEASES  163 

safe  as  they  may  contain  Areca  Nut,  a  dangerous  drug  to  ever  use,  as  it 
shoots  through  the  dog  like  lightning,  but,  if  any  of  it  remains  in  the  dog, 
it  means  inflamation  of  the  intestines,  and  most  always  a  dead  dog.  It  is 
a  very  old  remedy,  too  old,  used  in  years  gone  by  when  they  did  not  know 
so  much  as  we  do  now.  In  my  article  against  Tape  Worms,  I  warned  against 
the  use  of  Areca  Nut. 

Better  give  too  small  a  dose,  than  an  over  dose,  of  any  Vermifuge, 
and  give  it  oftener,  or,  as  long  as  you  see  signs  of  the  dog  having  worms. 
The  three  principle  kinds  that  infest  dogs  are: 

First — The  Common  Round  or  Stomach  Worm,  of  a  pale,  pink  or  flesh 
color,  pointed  at  both  ends  and  from  two  to  six  inches  long;  in  appearance 
very  much  like  the  common  earth  or  fish  worm;  this  kind  is  most  common 
in  puppies. 

Second — The  Tape  Worm,  which  is  made  up  of  flat  sections  joined  to- 
gether, and  these  sections  being  from  a  quarter  to  an  inch  in  length,  and 
in  color  nearly  white,  the  tail  being  the  largest  and  longest  section,  which 
gradually  gets  smaller  and  shorter  toward  the  head  to  such  an  extent  that  it 
looks  to  the  naked  eye  as  fine  as  a  thread.  Under  a  strong  glass  this  part 
will  look  like  a  lot  of  very  small  beads  strung  on  a  fine  thread.  Here  is 
where  to  look  for  the  head,  which  is  described  by  Stonehenge  as  follows: 
"The  head  is  small,  and  generally  hemispherical,  broader  than  long,  and 
often  as  truncated  anteriorly;  the  four  mouths,  or  oscula,  are  situated 
on  the  anterior  surface,  and  surround  the  central  rostellum,  which  is  very 
short,  terminated  by  a  minute  opical  papilla  and  surrounded  by  a  double 
circle  of  small  recurved  hooks."  The  head  can  seldom  be  seen  or  found 
with  the  naked  eye.  It  is  larger  than  the  neck  but  yet  too  small  to  be 
seen  unless  under  a  glass. 

Third — The  Maw  Worm  (or  pin,  or  thread  worm,  as  it  is  variously 
called)  is  located  in  the  rectum  and  is  nearly  pink  in  color,  and  from  a 
half  to  an  inch  long.  These  are  the  least  dangerous  of  all  worms,  but 
cause  great  irritation.  They  are  passed  adhering  to  the  feces.  In  puppies 
these  sometimes  cause  partial  paralysis  which  disappears  after  the  worms 
are  passed.  Some  authors  claim  that  the  maw  worm  are  segments  of  the 
tape  worm,  but  I  think  it  is  a  separate  species  altogether.  The  common 
round  stomach  worms  which  inhabit  the  stomach  and  small  intestines  are 
most  to  be  feared  of  all,  being  more  peculiar  to  puppies,  causing  irritation 
of  the  stomach  and  intestines,  indigestion,  fits,  diarrhea,  and  obstruction 
of  the  bowels.  Your  puppy  has  a  much  greater  chance  to  live  when  the 
worms  are  gotten  rid  of,  as  their  presence  leads  to  so  many  dangerous 
complications. 

Fourth — Hook  Worms — these  you  will  find  treated  under  a  special 
article  elsewhere. 

Dalziel  says:  "The  varieties  of  worms  Infesting  dogs  are  very  num- 
erous, far  more  so  than  dog  owners  in  general  have  the  slightest  idea  of, 
but  some  varieties  fortunately  are  rare.  A  variety  has  been  found  in  the 
eye,  another  in  the  nasal  sinuses,  where  it  causes  great  irritation;  the  cruel 
Thread  Worm  finds  its  way  into  the  heart,  producing  a  most  painful  death; 
Borne  are  found  in  the  blood,  the  liver  has  its  parasite,  so  have  the  kid- 
ney* and  urethra." 

As  has  been  the  custom  of  writers  and  owners  of  dogs  to  classify  them 


1&4  DISEASES 

under  the  headings  of  round-worm,  maw-worm  and  tape-worm,  I  have 
in  this  article  done  the  same  ,as  these  are  the  kinds  that  mostly  concern 
dog  owners. 

Symptoms  of  Stomach  Worms  in  young  puppies  are  plain  to  be  seen; 
they  pass  them,  also  vomit  them  up;  they  cause  Diarrhea,  and  you  will 
find  mucus,  or  slime,  and  sometimes  blood  in  the  passage.  You  will  also 
notice  a  distension  and  hardness  of  the  stomach  very  much  disproportion- 
ate to  amount  of  food  they  have  eaten  and  you  may  notice  the  puppy  drag- 
ging itself  on  its  stern  or  biting  at  its  tail.  In  older  dogs  most  of  these 
same  symptoms  appear,  as  well  as  others  here  enumerated;  a  foul  breath, 
nose  is  hot  and  dry,  hacking  cough,  fits,  vomiting  of  their  food  mixed  with 
mucus,  rough  and  staring  coat,  indigeston,  disturbed  sleep,  colic,  pains'  and 
emaciation. 

The  question  is  often  asked  at  what  period  after  service  should  a 
bitch  be  treated  for  worms,  or  rather  how  soon  before  whelping?  A  fort- 
night or  three  weeks  is  about  the  limit  after  service,  but  they  have  been 
treated  without  bad  result  within  three  weeks  of  whelping. 

If  you  have  your  puppies  confined  in  a  yard  it  is  very  easy  to  watch 
their  passages,  and  this  is  one  of  the  surest  ways  of  all;  then,  as  soon  as 
you  see  mucus  or  worms  passed  you  know  they  have  them,  and  can  go  to 
work  at  once  to  treat  them.  Now,  as  to  stomach  or  round  worms — if  they 
appear  before  pups  are  weaned  in  such  quantities  that  you  deem  it  advis- 
able or  safest  to  treat,  as  it  most  generally  is,  select  the  vermifuge  you 
wish  to  use  and  then  be  guided  as  to  size  of  dose  and  age  of  puppy. 

Now,  here,  on  this  most  important  subject  of  Worms,  I  want  to  say  all 
the  good  I  can  for  the  sake  of  saving  the  puppies.  You  will  find  advertised 
in  this  book  worm  remedies  made  by  Glover,  Clayton,  Polk  Miller,  and  the 
Vermilax  Company  and  the  C.  S.  R.  Remedy  Co.  Look  them  up  in  the 
very  interesting  and  valuable  lot  of  advertisements  you  will  find  in  this 
book  (as  beneficial  and  important,  even  if  they  are  "advertisements,"  and 
paid  for  to  insert),  as  in  using  these  already  prepared  vermifuges  you 
cannot  go  amiss  if  their  directions,  and  what  I  say  as  to  administering  them, 
is  followed.  I  have  used  every  one  of  them,  and  it  is  far  better  to  use 
some  one  of  these  well  known  worm  .remedies  that  are  made  for  dogs  by 
reliable  and  experienced  parties  in  treating  dogs,  than  to  take  chances  or 
go  to  the  trouble  of  having  other  prescriptions  filled.  I  am  not  getting 
paid  extra  to  recommend  anyone's  vermifuge,  for  I  would  not  do  so  unless 
I  thought  and  believed  the  article  would  save  puppies — my  main  object 
in  this  book  being  to  do  good  to  dogs.  I  could  give  you — as  most  dog 
books  do  give — a  lot  of  prescriptions,  but  only  give  one,  so  that  in  case 
you  do  not  happen  to  have  on  hand,  or  cannot  get  one  of  these  mentioned, 
then  you  could  get  this  one  filled  and  use  till  you  could  order  one  of  the 
others.  Right  here  I  want  to  say — never  use  areca  nut  for  worms  in  any 
form,  or  any  vermifuge  that  contains  this  dangerous  drug  if  you  know 
it,  for  while  it  expels  the  worms  by  the  "fast  train"  route,  it  also  kills 
more  dogs  by  far  than  it  ever  saves.  Areca  nut  is  a  relic  of  a  past  decade 
— avoid  its  use. 

The  following  article  on  Symptoms  of  Worms,  was  published  in  Field 
and  Fancy,  (I  think  written  by  F.  J.  Skinner),  and  certainly  worthy  of 
space  in  this  book: 


DISEASES  155 

"What  are  the  symptoms  by  which  it  can  be  determined  that  a  dog 
Is  suffering  from  worms?  As  regards  puppies,  the  symptoms  are  very 
clear. 

They  begin  to  get  thin,  and  they  have  an  appearance  that  can  best 
be  described  by  the  not  very  euphonious  or  deiicate,  but  certainly  vivid, 
description  of  'pot-bellied.' 

This  means  that  the  round  worms  with  which  they  become  infested 
develop  to  such  an  extent  as  to  give  them  a  hanging  appearance,  which 
every  one  that  has  had  experience  in  raising  puppies  will  speedily  recognize 
as  symptomatic  of  the  presence  of  worms. 

The  puppies  become  very  voracious,  yet  do  not  seem  to  thrive,  and  in 
a  majority  of  cases  they  have  fits,  and  unless  relief  be  given  very  soon 
they  will  die  In  these  fits. 

Another  symptom  is  diarrhoea,  which,  of  course,  is  due  to  the  irritated 
condition  of  the  intestines. 

The  administration  of  worm  medicine  in  any  shape  or  form,  how- 
ever simple,  to  puppies  is  always  attended  with  no  small  amount  of  risk, 
and  for  this  reason,  as  it  seems  to  us — that  the  effect  of  a  mild  dose  of 
medicine  is  simple  to  stir  up  the  worms  when  a  puppy  is  badly  infested, 
which    is    practically    as    bad    as    giving    an    overstrong    dose. 

The  mild  dose  stirs  them  up  and  causes  a  fit,  when  the  overstrong  dose 
may  have  what  is  practically  a  poisonous  effect.  Repeat  the  dose  in  a  mild- 
er form  in  about  a  week,  and  then  it  will  be  safe  to  assume  that  the  puppy 
has  been  cleared  entirely.  After  this  take  the  precaution  to  give  from  time 
to  time  some  little  laxative  medicine.  In  this  way  you  can  effectively 
prevent  the  development  of  worms  to  any  serious  extent,  and  so  there  will 
not  be  any  further  need  for  the  stronger  vermifuges  which  are  required 
when  a  puppy  is   badly   infested. 

The  following  are  among  the  many  symptomatic  indications  of  worms: 

The  Eyes. — Pupils  almost  constantly  dilated;  the  eyelids  nearly  closed, 
as  though  aching,  which  is  aggravated  by  motion;  sensitive  to  light;  the 
whites  of  eyes  red  and  in  jested;  patient  acts  as  though  sight  were  de- 
fective, being  guarded  in  its  movements;  eyeballs  roll  about  in  distorted 
fashion;    opacity  of  the  lens  and   amaurotic   conditions. 

The  Nose. — Great  irritation,  evidenced  by  frequent  rubbing  on  the 
ground  or  with  the  paws.  . 

The  Tongue. — The  dorsum  centrally  coated  with  yellow  fur;  on  the 
sides  appear  round  or  oval  spots  of  a  pink  or  deep  crimson  color,  occasion- 
ally slightly  elevated  when  vomiting,  and  diarrhoea  are  present  accom- 
paniments, and  spots  are  observed  through  the  coating  of  fur. 

The  Mouth. — Dribbling  of  slimy  saliva,  especially  during  sleep;  breath 
fetid  and  very  offensive;  frequent  grinding  of  the  teeth,  both  when  asleep 
and   awake. 

Cough. — Dry,   short   and    spasmodic. 

Appetite. — Capricious,  depraved,  frequently  ravenous,  occasionally  in 
abeyance. 

Heart. — Palpitation;  violence  and  irregular  action;  sharp  pains,  indn 
cated  by  crying  out  and  biting  at  the  ribs  over  tiie  seat  of  heart;  very 
rapid  breathing. 

Abdomen.-f-Swollen  and   hard   to   the   touch;    griping  pains,   indicated 


168  ;  DISEASES  !   r       * 

by  rolling  about;  lying  on  stomach  with  outstretched  legs;  flatulenc*; 
voniition. 

Anus. — Considerable  local  irritation,  indicated  by  dragging  along  on 
the  hindquarters;  protrusion  of  the  mucous  membrane  and  prolapse  of  the 
parts. 

Skin. — Coat  rough,  stands  on  end;  abundant  scurf;  herpetic  eruptions; 
thick  and  lacking  usual  pliability. 

Foeces. — Constipated,  with  frequent  ineffective  efforts  to  pass;  coated 
with  slimy  mucus;  or  loose,  papescent,  mixed  with  slimy  mucus;  great 
straining;  dark  colored,  sometimes  bloody,  and  very  offensive;  discharges 
of  slimy  mucus  only  are  frequently  observable;  at  such  times  evacuations 
are  white  or  greenish,  attended  with  much  straining. 

Urine, — Passed  with  difficulty;  pale  or  milky  appearance;  or  whit* 
and  thick,  passed  involuntarily. 

Nervous  System. — Convulsions,  cramps,  paralysis,  giddiness,  irritabil- 
ity, sleeplessness,  depression,  restlessness;  suddenly  jumps  up  out  of  sleep, 
whines  and  cries  out  a  with  fear;  epilepy;  chorea. 

The  presence  of  worms  naturally  tends  to  reduce  a  dog  in  condition, 
and  many  dogs  remain  permanently  so  until  a  thorpugh  dosing  is  given 
them,  which  is  effective  in  ridding  them  of  the  nuisance." 

As  to  worms,  it  is  never  necessary  to  consult  a  veterinarian,  in  fact, 
safer  not  to  do  so,  as  too  many  of  them  prescribe  and  use  medicines  that 
are  dangerous,  have  to  be  given  too  often,  and  in  too  large  quantities.  In 
case  you  are  where  you  cannot  get  the  vermifuges  I  have  mentioned,  and 
cannot  wait  till  you  could  get  them,  then  here  is  a  prescription  for  worms: 

Oil  of  male  shield  fern    1   dram 

Santonine    8   grains 

Fluid   extract  of  jalap    1   ounce 

Olive    oil     1   ounce 

Oil  of  anise    20   drops 

"Dose  for  puppies  two  to  four  months  old,  one  and  a  half  teaspoons- 
ful;  seven  to  ten  months  old,  two;  and  grown  dogs,  two  and  a  half 
or  three  teaspoonfuls,  given  on  an  empty  stomach. 
r - 

"Above  doses  are  for  dogs  that  weigh  when  grown  from  50  pounds 
to  100  pounds.  For  smaller  dogs  weighing  about  25  pounds  take  two- 
thirds,  and  toy  dogs  of  about  10  pounds  take  one-third  the  above  doses. 
In  treating  puppies  with  this  remedy,  give  only  one  dose;  on  old  dogs,  re- 
peat once  or  twice." 

There  is  no  use  giving  any  worm  remedy  unless  the  dog  has  been 
prepared  for  it  by  a  proper  fasting,  and  the  medicine  is  put  in  them  when 
bowels  are  empty.  You  must  catch  the  worms  by  fishing  for  them  when 
they  are  hungry,  the  exception  of  this  rule  being,  of  course,  in  the  case  of 
treating  puppies  yet  unweaned.  This  is,  as  before  said,  not  so  often  ne- 
cessary. 

Dr.  Clayton  furnishes  me  directions  as  to  giving  his  Vermifuge  as 
follows:  "The  dose  for  toy  dog  ten  days  old  is  two  to  five  drops,  twenty 
days  old  fiv«  to  ten  drops,  thirty  days  old  ten  to  thirty  drops.     Medium  and 


ENGLISH 
PUGS 

Aristocratic 
Canines 


There  is  something  singularly  pathetic  ami  magnetic  in  a  Vug  puppy's  pretty  eyes. 
They  dilate,  fairly  glow  with  pleasure  and  joy  supreme  at  glance  from  master,  mis- 
tress  or   child   companion. 

YOU    CANNOT    BE    DOWNCAST 
nor  sad   with   baby   Pug  flitting  about,   insisting  that   you  join   in  frolic   or   fun   it   has 
started.     Costs  no  more  to  feed   a   pedigreed   Pug  than   a   dog  of   lowly  ancestry.     Two 
or  three  Pugs  will  thrive  on  table  scraps. 

MAKE    GLAD    THE    HEART 

of  loved  little  boy  or  girl  with  a  pet  Pug.  Toys,  dolls,  books  or  games  may  be  dis- 
carded, but  Towser,  Bowser,  or  "What-You-May-Call-Hiin,"  will  only  grow  more  dear 
day  by  day,  children  happier,  home  brighter,  mother,  father  and  entire  household  proud 
of  their  devoted  and  affectionate  pet,  though  diminutive  in  size,  literally  the  biggest 
boss   on   premises. 

WE   GUARANTEE    SATISFACTION 
with  every  sale  made.     We  cannot  ship  C.   O.  D.,  but  you  may  inspect,   or  have   your 
friends   pass   upon   the   dog,   and    if  not   satisfactory,   return,   and   price   paid   goes    back 
promptly,   no   questions   asked,   you   are   the   judge.     If    dog   suits    us,    it   is    bound    to 
please   you. 

WITH    LARGEST    AND    FINEST    KENNEL    OF    PUGS 
before  the  public  today,  we  are  able  to  suit  or  satisfy  any  prospective  purchaser,  mak- 
ing prices  that  will  meet  views  of  those  interested   in  these   classy   little  canines. 

SEND    MATRONS    TO    US    FOR   MATING. 

If  you  have  a  good  matron,  let  us  see  her  and  mate  with  one  of  our  dogs,  through 
whose  veins  course  the  best  blue  blood  ever  produced  in  England  or  British  Isles  and 
imported  to  mate  with  our  best  matrons. 

CHAMPION   "CROCK   OF   GOLD" 

Probably  the  best  Pug  ever  produced  in  England,  according  to  judgeR,  artists, 
fanciers  and  breeders.  Pictured,  painted  and  illustrated  as  the  MODEL  for  Pug  breed- 
ers to  strive  to  duplicate.  "Crock  of  Gold"  is  the  winner  of  ten  Championships,  in 
addition  to  a  cart  load  or  more  of  cups,  medals,  trophies,   and  etc.     Fee,  $50. 

"TURRET   SHADRACH" 

Another  Imported  one  that  won  his  spurs  at  Cruft's  Palace  Show,  London,  England, 
with  the  biggest  bunch  of  Pugs  ever  displayed.  Shadrach  weighs  but  12  pounds,  and 
produces  pups  of  his  own  style.     Fee,  $25. 

"TURRET   SAMBO"   the   Second. 

"Sambo"  is  a  grand-son  of  "Turret  Isaac,"  who  is  conceded  to  be  a  masterpiece 
among  Pugs,  many  contending  that  he  is  the  best  dog  in  England,  and  Sambo  looks 
like  his  illustrious  grand-sire.     Fee  $15. 

"BAD-BULLY -BOY" 

This  is  an  American-bred  Pug.  He  has  the  ability  to  stamp  his  progeny  with  the 
trace  and   markings   so  desirable  to  Pug  lovers.     Fee  $10. 

REILLY    PUG     KENNELS, 
42    SEVENTEENTH    STREET,  NEWPORT,    KENTUCKY. 


158  DISEASES 

large  breeds,  twice  and  three  times  the  amount,  to  be  varied  by  the  size 
and  strength  of  the  animal,  and  can  be  given  with  perfect  safety.  I  have 
yet  to  see  one  unpleasant  result  of  the  Vermifuge,  and  I  will  pay  for  any 
pup  that  has  been  properly  treated  with  my  Vermifuge  in  time,  that  dies 
of  worms.  I  will  put  up  twice  the  value  of  the  pup,  and  after  I  have  given 
a  dose  of  my  Vermifuge,  if  the  pup  dies  and  there  is  found  one  worm,  the 
owner  takes  the  money;  if  there  are  no  worms,  the  owner  stands  the  loss. 
I  absolutely  guarantee  to  remove  all  worms  with  my  remedies,  without 
injury  to  the  animal,  and  you  cannot  speak  too  highly  of  my  worm  reme- 
dies." 

Dr.  Clayton  further  says:  "Puppies  never  do  so  well  as  when  get- 
ting the  nourishment  from  the  mother,  and  if  it  is  possible  to  rid  them  of 
worms  at  this  t'me  it  is  very  much  to  be  desired,  this  can  be  accomplished 
by  giving  Clayton's  Vermifuge,  as  it  is  a  safe  remedy  and  can  be  given  to 
puppies  at  ten  days'  old,  any  breed.  The  Vermifuge  should  never  be  given 
oftener  than  once  a  week.  It  is  a  good  plan  to  give  all  puppies  the  Vermi- 
fuge, say  once  a  week  from  ten  days  old  until  they  are  three  months  old, 
as  you  are  then  absolutely  sure  your  puppies  are  free  from  worms,  and 
barring  all  contagious  diseases  will  soon  arrive  at  the  teething  period." 

Now,  what  I  have  written  and  furnished  you  in  the  foregoing  is  meant 
for  Stomach  or  Round  Worms  espec'ally.  Any  of  these  Vermifuges  might 
also  expel  tape  worm,  but  I  now  treat  of  it,  and  a  remedy  that  is  certain, 
safe  and  sure,  one  made  and  intended  to  be  used  on  human's  for  tape 
worm,  but  adapted  to  and  used  on  the  dog,  by  the  writer: 

Tape  Worm — Symptoms  of  Tape  Worm. — An  irregular  and  frequently 
a  ravenous  appetite  co-existing  with  considerable  emaciation,  the  food  taken 
seeming  to  do  the  dog  no  good.  The  breath  is  offensive,  and  nose  hot  and 
dry.  The  coat  has  a  rough,  harsh,  staring,  unhealthy  look,  the  hair  looking 
dead.  I  have,  however,  found  tape  worms  in  a  pug  dog  that  had  a  sleek 
and  glossy  coat  and  was  fat  and  healthy.  They  often  have  a  depraved  ap- 
petite, looking  for  and  eating  filth.  Parts  of  the  worm  may  sometimes  be 
seen  hanging  from  the  anus  of  the  dog,  this  being  the  case  in  the  pug  spoken 
of,  and  who  had  never  shown  any  signs  of  having  such  trouble,  as  she  was 
a  bitch  that  had  had  several  litters  of  pups. 

I  prefer  mixing  it  in  molasses,  as  this  is  sweet  and  also  a  physic.  It 
should  work  him  in  from  half  an  hour  to  an  hour,  but  sometimes  takes 
longer. 

Another   way   to  give  it  is  by  mixing  the  powder  in   castor  or  olive  oil, 
the  way  it  is  given  by  doctors  in  treating  human  beings  for  tape  worm. 

Now,  arrange  to  have  it  so  you  can  examine  the  passages  by  dog  being 
confined  in  a  yard.  Be  there  yourself  till  it  has  worked  the  dog,  don't  give 
it  up  and  go  away,  for  this  catching  tape  worms  is  not  easy  fishing,  and  you 
must  give  it  your  attention.  Examine  each  stool  and  carefully  pick  out 
the  part  of  worm  it  may  contain,  wash  this  off  and  put  it  on  a  sheet  of 
paper  so  you  can  examine  it  and  see  what  luck  you  had  in  that  haul,  or  if 
you  got  the  head  that  time.  You  can  buy  at  a  small  cost  a  magnifying  glass, 
as  the  head  cannot  be  seen  with  the  naked  eye.  As  soon  as  medicine  is 
through  working,  feed  up  your  dog,  for  he  will  relish  a  good  meal.  If  you 
find  the  head,  then  I  would  let  the  dog  go  for  a  week  before  you  give  him 


DISEASES  159 

another  dose,  but  if  you  have  not  found  the  head  then  repeat  dose  in  two 
or  three  days. 

In  tape  worm  cases  the  treatment  must  be  repeated  and  persevered 
with  until  the  head  of  the  worm  is  expelled,  and  in  all  cases  the  worms  and 
all  discharged  feces  should  be  either  burned  or  destroyed  by  mixing  it  with 
some  powerful  disinfectant  and  then  buried,  to  prevent  propagation  of  the 
parasites  by  their  ova. 

You  may  get  one  worm  or  more,  and  yet  the  dog  may  have  more  tape 
worms,  which  treat  for  later  on  if  symptoms  again  appear.  Here  is  another 
prescription   which   is  recommended   by  Dalz'el: 

Treatment  for  Tape  Worm. — I  will  now. divulge  the  secret  of  the  rem- 
edy that  I  have  sold  for  years  under  the  name  of  "Eberhart's  Tape  Worm 
Remedy,"  and  which  has  never  failed  and  never  will  fail  to  remove  tape 
worms,  head  and  all,  if  directions  are  followed.  Kamala  is  the  article.  It 
is  a  product  of  India,  a  fine  granular  powder  of  a  reddish,  brown  color, 
obtained  from  the  minute  glands  adhering  to  the  capsules  of  Rottlera 
tinctoria. 

Some  ten  years  ago  my  pug  "Boycott"  was  afflicted  with  tape  worm,  not 
only  one  but  several  (as  is  sometimes  the  case),  and  I  tried  every  known 
remedy  and  each  case  failed  to  rid  him  of  the  worms,  besides  nearly  ruin- 
ing the  dog.  I  paid  one  tape  worm  doctor  (who  treated  people)  ten  dollars 
to  work  on  my  dog  one  entire  day,  and  lie  fa'ied  to  get  the  head  of  the 
worm,  and  the  poor  dog  was  sick  for  many  days  afterward,  due  to  the 
severe  ordeal  and  treatment.  I  then  discovered  "Kamala,"  which  had  been 
used  for  human  beings,  and  in  less  than  a  week  I  had  removed  three  tape 
worms    (including   heads)    aggregating    eighty    feet    in    length. 

Kamala  is  entirely  harmless,  never  causing  irritation  or  inflammation, 
and  unlike  other  remedies,  its  use  does  not  leave  the  patient  in  a  weakened 
condition,  but  exactly  the  reverse  in  this  respect- — the  dog  feeling  better, 
is  braced  up,  acts  happy  and  better  than  before  taking  it.  So  harmless  do 
I  know  it  to  be,  that  many  times  I  have  given  it  as  an  ordinary  physic 
when  I  did  not  have  castor  oil  on  hand.  It  is  the  greatest  tape  worm 
remedy  ever  used  and  I  now  give  up  the  secret  purely  for  the  good  of  dogs, 
as  I  have  sold  it  for  years  and  am  receiving  orders  for  it  almost  daily, 
it  having  been  a  profitable  part  of  my  business. 

It  is  also  a  very  good  remedy  for  removing  round  worms.  Being  a  com- 
paratively new  remedy  at  this  writing,  not  all  druggists  keep  it,  and  espe- 
cially in  smaller  towns,  and  if  your  druggist  has  not  got  it  send  to  me 
and  I  can  mail  it  to  you,  as  my  druggist  in  Cincinnati  keeps  it  in  stock, 
and  always  fresh,  which  is  highly  important,  as  it  must  be  fresh  and  kept 
in  a  tightly  corked  bottle.  For  Fifty  Cents  I  can  send  it  by  mail — enough 
usually  for  any  dog.  This  one  remedy  alone  is  worth  the  cost  of  a  good 
many  copies  of  this  book. 

Never  use  areca  nut,  the  relict  of  a  past  age,  which  has  for  so  long  a 
time  been  used  for  tape  worm,  and  has  killed  more  dogs  than  it  ever  cured, 
a  deadly  and  dangerous  remedy. 

How  to  Use  Kamala. 

Fast  your  dog  for  twenty-four  hours   (a  day  and  a  night)   and  then  in 


160  '-"    '"  DISEASES  . 

the  morning  give  him  the  dose.  A  strong  and  mature  dog  should  be  kept 
without  food  for  twenty-four  hours,  weakly  dogs  and  puppies,  a  less  period, 
but  sufficient  to  empty  the  stomach,  for  it  is  no  use  giving  vermifuge  on  a 
full  stomach,   except  to  young  puppies,  of  course. 

Weigh  your  dog  and  if  he  is  ordinarily  strong  and  healthy,  the  size 
dose  to  give  is  two  grains  for  each  pound  the  dog  weighs.  If  the  dog  is 
not  in  usual  health  or  is  a  weakly  sort,  try  it  first — one  and  a  half  grains 
to  each  pound.  Kamala  is  tasteless,  and  unless  the  dog  gets  the  idea  you 
are  "giving  him  medicine"  it  is  easily  administered  as  follows:  I  give  it 
mixed  in  molasses  and  then  put  it  in  his  mouth,  rubbing  whatever  is  left 
on  your  finger,  on  his  nose  and  he  will  lick  it  off  himself. 

In  using  Kamala,  should  you  give  an  overdose,  no  harm  will  result 
from  it,  as  it  is  not  a  drug.  An  even  teaspoonful  of  Kamala  is  sixty  grains, 
and  taking  this  as  a  guide,  you  can  come  near  enough  to  the  proper  dose 
for  any  dog,  if  you  have  the  dog's  weight,  as  for  instance,  if  your  dog 
weighed  sixty  pounds,  then  the  dose  would  be  two  teaspoonfuls,  and  you 
can  get  at  it  this  way,  or  a  better  plan  is  to  get  your  druggist  to  weigh  it 
out  into  proper  sized  doses,  telling  him  weight  of  dog  and  that  the  dose 
is   two   grains   to   each  pound   dog   weighs. 

You  may  find  difficulty  in  getting  Kamala,  many  druggists  not  keep- 
ing it,  and  some  of  them  even  not  knowing  as  to  it,  and  if  you  cannot 
obtain  it  of  your  druggist,  I  can  send  it  to  you  by  mail,  two  hundred  and 
forty  grains  for  fifty  cents.  It  must  be  fresh,  and  what  you  do  not  use 
must  be  kept  in  a  tight  glass  stoppered  bottle  to  retain  its  virtues  for  fu- 
ture use.  Kamala  is  the  greatest  tape  worm  remedy  of  all.  I  am  satis- 
fied and  sure  that  it  is,  and  since  I  first  made  it  public  in  my  second  edi- 
tion of  this  book,  several  makers  of  worm  remedies  are  using  it  in  their 
worm  preparations.  One  regular  physician  in  Mississippi  who  had  prac- 
ticed medicine  for  forty  years,  and  who  bred  hounds,  not  knowing  of 
Kamala,  ordered  it,  and  later  wrote  me  that  from  one  dog  he  got  eighty- 
two  feet  of  tape  worm,  and  that  he  should  adopt  and  use  Kamala  here- 
after in   his  practice  on   humans. 

Dalziel  says  of  Tape  Worms. — "These  are,  as  the  name  indicates,  the 
flat  worms  which  are  often  seen  evacuated  with  the  feces  in  small  sections 
of  half  an  inch  or  less,  when  they  are  usually  called  'maw-worms;'  or  at 
times  chains  of  them  may  be  seen  hanging  from  the  anus,  when  being 
expelled  naturally  or  under  the  action  of  medicine. 

"No  less  than  a  dozen  tapeworms  select  the  dog  as  their  host.  They 
have  a  remarkable  life-history,  and  it  is  as  well  for  the  dog  owner  to 
know  something  as  to  this,  as  he  is  often  puzzled  to  think  how  this  or 
that  dog  became  infested. 

"It  will  therefore  be  well  to  see  how  an  adult  tape  worm  is  made  up. 
If  examined,  it  will  be  found  to  consist  of  a  head,  or  scolex,  and  a  series 
of  segments,  scientifically  known  as  metameres.  These  latter  are  con- 
stantly being  budded  off  from  the  head,  and  assume  forms  varying  with 
their  age.  Thus  those  nearest  the  head  are  the  youngest,  and  those  at 
the  other  extremity  the  oldest.  It  is  these  last  which  one  sees  from  time 
to  time  pass  with  the  faecal  discharges.  They  are,  in  fact,  the  ripe  segments, 
or  proglottids,  which  detach  themselves  from  the  hind  portion,  and  each 
portion  thus  freed  is  endowed  with  reproductive  organs.     In   tim©  these 


— DISEASES  161 

detached  portions  die  away,  but  the  eggs  contained  In  them  have  been 
impregnated  by  spermatozoa  and  simply  await  another  host  to  begin  anew 
the  cycle  of  existence.  The  eggs  thus  scattered  broadcast  are  not  influ- 
•  enced  by  extremes  of  heat  or  cold,  dryness  or  moisture,  nor  does  time  seem 
to  destroy  their  germinating  power.  From  this  it  will  readily  be  seen 
how  important  it  is  to  burn  all  excreta  from  dogs  infested  with  tape  worms. 
When  the  ripe  segments  leave  the  dog  per  anus  they  are  charged  with 
ova,  and  possessing  the  power  of  motion,  wriggle  among  the  hair,  where 
the  lice  and  fleas  devour  the  eggs  and  develop  into  the  cryptocysts  found 
by  Grassi  free  in  the  abdominal  cavity.  The  dog  again,  in  searching  for 
his  tormentors,  nibbles  and  licks  his  skin  and  coat,  and  in  this  way  swal- 
lows the  insect,  and  when  the  contained  cryptocyst  is  set  free  in  the  dog's 
stomach  the  tapeworm  is  once  more  developed.  The  nimble  flea  travels 
so  readily  from  one  dog  to  another,  carrying  this  tape  worm  with  him, 
that  we  have  here  an  explanation  of  what  has  puzzled  so  many — how  a 
carefully  fed  and  groomed  house  dog  becomes  infested  with  tape  worm?" 

Maw  Worms. — Treatment  for  Maw  Worms. — These  can  be  reached  and 
expelled  by  the  following  injection  per  rectum:  Aloes,  1  dram.  Put  the 
aloes  into  a  tea  cup  of  warm  water  and  then  put  it  into  a  bottle.  Inject 
once  every  day,  until  no  more  are  to  be  seen  passing  from  the  dog.  Use 
rubber  syringe  and  hold  rear  part  of  the  dog  up  for  five  minutes  after 
injecting.  It  will  do  no  harm  and  facilitate  matters  by  having  given  an 
hour  beforehand  a  dose  of  Kamala  (see  tape  worm),  as  the  Kamala  will 
give  dog  a  thorough  cleaning  out,  and  with  this  start  expel  a  lot  of  these 
worms.  The  Kamala  need  only  be  given  once  in  treating  for  maw  worms 
— the  first  day  you  begin  treating  dog. 

Another  good  injection  for  rectum  or  maw  worms  is  a  solution  of 
quassia  chips.     A  handful  steeped  in  water  for  six  hours. 

Yellows,  The. — See  Jaundice  and  Distemper. 


162  DISTEMPER 


DISTEMPER 


Distemper. — This  disease  trouble  breeders  more  and  causes  more  deaths 
than  anything  else,  except  perhaps  worm.  It  is  the  hardest  subject  I  have 
to  handle  in  this  book,  and  as  too  much  information  on  this  dreaded  dis- 
ease we  cannct  know,  I  have  secured  for  this  article  about  all  I  could  get. 
Read  and  study  up  this  subject  before  distemper  appears,  so  as  to  be  then 
prepared  to  attend  to  it  when  your  dogs  are  so' unfortunate  as  to  have  it. 
It  is  not  a  foregone  conclusion  that  a  dog  must  die,  because  he  has  dis- 
temper; I  have  had  many  dogs  get  it  and  get  well,  and  I  now  have  dogs 
in  my  kennel  that  got  safely  over  it,  and-  these  same  dogs  afterwards  ex- 
posed to  it  several-  times  and  did  not  again  have  it.  As  to  this,  I  believe 
that  it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  a  grown  dog  will  have  it  the  second 
time,  if  exposed,  any  more  than  a  man  is  in  danger  of  getting  smallpox 
after  having  passed  safely  through  it.  Lately  I  had  two  cases  of  distemper 
in  my  kennel,  one  being  a  boarder,  a  Cocker  spaniel,  and  the  other,  one 
of  my  own  poodles,  both  young  dogs  of  six  months.  Unfortunately  both 
cases  proved  fatal,  but  I  checked  it  up  here  and  not  another  one  of  the 
fifty  other  dogs  in  the  kennel  had  it  at  all,  which  was  indeed  lucky,  as  it 
was  impossible  to  prevent  most  of  them  from  exposure  at  the  first  stages 
of  the  disease  when  these  two  were  taken  down  with  it.  What  I  did  do, 
however,  was  to  immediately  take  steps  to  prevent,  especially  the  young- 
er dogs  from  getting  it.  This  I  did  by  at  once  isolating  the  ones  that  had 
It,  thoroughly  disinfecting  all  kennels,  destroying  the  bedding  that  had  been 
see  how  they  ate,  and  condition  of  passages,  and  am  glad  to  say  that  this 
time  I  confined  it  to  the  two  that  died. 

It  is  a  wise  plan  to  have  this  remedy  on  hand,  so  that  when  distemper 
used,  and  then  putting  every  dOg  that  had  been  exposed  on  either  Clayton's 
few  clays,  watching  every  dog  for  any  signs  of  distemper  coming,  also  as  to 
Distemperine,  which  has  been  my  standby  for  years.  This  I  kept  up  for  a 
comes,  you  can  go  to  work  on  the  dog  at  once,  and  not  make  it  worse  by 
having  to  wait  till  you  can  get  the  remedy.  Since  writing  my  first  book 
I  have  used  the  "Onion  Remedy"  of  my  friend,  William  Saxby,  the  Beagle 
breeder  of  Ilion,  N.  Y.  This,  in  addition  to  other  treatment,  and  with  good 
results,  as  it  can  do  no  harm  and  will  surely  do  good.  It  is  called  the 
"Home   Made  Distemper   Cure,"   and   was   published   in   all   the  dog   papers: 

Slice  a  sound  raw  onion  (the  stronger  the  better)  and  put  into  a 
stocking  leg  and  with  safety  pins  fasten  around  the  dog's  neck,  with  the 
onions  under  the  chin.  This  will  cause  the  discharge  to  be  watery;  renew 
often  enough  to  keep  it  watery  (say  every  other  day)  and  with  careful 
nursing  you  will  be  surprised  at  your  success. 

How  to  diet  a  clog  during  distemper  is  a  question  to  which  the  answer 
must  vary  according  to  the  circumstances  of  the  case.  It  goes  without 
say  ng,  however,  that  in  all  cases  srd'd  meat  must  be  tabooed — anything 
likely  to  raise  the  temperature  being  highly  unsuitable.  If  the  dog  is 
purged  violently,  milk,  with  a  small  percentage  of  l-'me  water  added,  would 
be  good,  as  would  also  port  wine  beaten  up  with  egg.  As  a  general  rule 
tbe  safest  plan  is  to  dispense  with  solids  altogether,  and  feed  on  gruels, 
broths,  beef  tea,  etc.,  remembering  that,  as  with  a  human  invalid  so  with  a 
canine,  it  is  equally  of  importance  to  p  ovide  only  light,  easily-digested 
nourishment,  since  the  stomach  is  affected  with  the  rest  of  the  body,  and 
what  it  could  easily  assimilate  during  health,  it  has  no  means  of  dealing 
with  during  sickness. 

Dog  biscuits  and  all  farinaceous  solids  are  to  be  avoided  now.     A  little 


DISTEMPER  163 

gruel  made  with  fine  Oatmeal  and  boiling  milk  will  usually  be  taken,  espe- 
cially if  not  too  thick.  Again,  though  we  dispense  with  meat,  gravy  may 
be  offered  and  soup  made  by  boiling  bones.  As  the  animal  regains  his 
strength  meat  may  be  recommended,  by  slow  degrees,  but  it  should  be 
thoroughly  cooked,  and  it  might  also  be  minced  with  advantage,  as  the 
dog,  even   in  sickness,  is  prone  to  his  natural  habit  of   "bolting"   food. 

Another  excellent  food  we  have  found  for  invalid  dogs  is  the  family 
rice  pudding — rice  baked  with  milk.  A  dog  will  generally  accept  this  and 
it  forms  both  a  satisfying  and  nutritious  meal. 

Keeping  them  eating  is  the  great  trouble — and  eat  they  must,  in  order 
to  sustain  sufficient  strength  to  get  through  this  trying  ordeal.  When  the 
dog  quits  eating  and  refuses  food,  try  and  coax  him  to  eat  by  getting  and 
cooking  him  something  new  and  delicate  that  he  has  not  been  used  to 
getting  ordinarily.  I  have  often  gone  out  and  bought  a  quail,  or  some 
delicacy  like  this,  and  he  would  eat  it  when  he  had  refused  everything  else. 
Gravy  made  with  flour  in  it,  from  stewed  chicken  giblets,  they  will  often  eat. 
It  requires  patience  on  the  owner's  part  and  too  much  care  and  kind- 
ness can  hardly  be  exercised,  as  they  materially  help  and  encourage  the 
dog  to  pull  through.  Some  dogs  give  up  much  easier  than  others,  for  a 
dog  with  distemper  is  a  very  sick  dog,  and  here  is  where  you  can  do 
them  a  lot  of  good  in  keeping  up  their  courage  by  the  attention  you  bestow 
on  them.  The  after  results  of  distemper  are  numerous  and  much  to  be 
dreaded,  especially  in  cases  that  have  not  been  promptly  treated.  Chorea 
is  the  worst  of  all  and  so  frequently  follows  distemper. 

Now,  as  an  after  medicine  to  build  the  dog  up,  Eberhart's  Tonic  Pills 
will  work  wonders.  By  this  I  mean  after  your  dog  is  over  distemper, 
yet  weak  and  very  much  run  down.  I  invariably  keep  my  dogs  on  these 
pills  for  a  few  weeks  until  they  are  again  themselves,  and  look  and  act 
like  well  dogs. 

Distemper  is  not  necessarily  fatal  if  proper  care  and  treatment  is  given, 
and  when  I  have  discovered  it  in  my  kennels,  I  do  not  give  up  and  think 
they  will  die,  but  I  go  to  work  at  the  first  signs  and  try,  and  expect  to  save 
them.  The  careful  nursing  and  attention  is  highly  important,  and  as  to 
this,  every  authority  on  the  subject  will  agree.  The  dog  has  to  go  through 
a  regular  siege  and  cannot  be  cured  in  a  few  days  by  any  medicine,  and 
too  much  medicine  would  be  even  worse  than  none  at  all — here  is  where 
the  good  nursing  comes  in.  If  you  do  this  part  all  right  and  can  keep 
the  dog  eating  enough  of  the  proper  food  to  keep  its  strength  up,  and  the 
surroundings  and  care  are  all  properly  looked  after,  the  dog  need  not  die. 

There  is  another  important  point,  and  that  is  in  regard  to  a  dog's  bed- 
ding. The  more  frequently  this  can  be  .changed  during  sickness  the  better. 
When  I  have  taken  a  lot  of  dogs  to  a  bench  show,  my  own  and  others, 
especially  if  I  knew  they  had  never  had  distemper,  I  have  always  made 
it  a  rule  to  give  these  dogs  either  one  or  the  other  of  these  remedies  during 
the  show,  and  for  a  few  days  after,  as  a  safeguard  against  their  contracting 
distemper  at  the  show,  and  with  only  one  exception  in  many  years  of 
exhibiting,  I  have  never  lost  a  dog  from  its  being  at  a  show.  I  believe, 
if  this  was  made  a  practice  by  all  exhibitors  at  dog  shows,  that  we  would 
not  hear  of  so  many  cases  of  distemper  as  an  after-result  of  exhibiting. 

The  following  article  on  this  disease  was  written  by  Wm.  A.  Bruette, 
D.  V.  S.,  ("Dent."),  the  well-  known  veterinary  surgeon  of  Chicago.  It 
is  a  very  complete  and  comprehensive  treatise  on  the  subject  by  a  man 
who  has  had  experience  with  dogs  for  years,  and  who,  besides  being  a 
qualified  veterinarian,  is  also  a  gradute  in  human  practice  and  is  consid- 
ered  reliable  authority  by  many  dog  fanciers: 

"Distemper.  (By  Dent.)  Of  the  various  diseases  that  dogdom  is 
heir  to  distemper  is  the  one  particular  black  cloud  to  the  breeder,  as  its 
ravages  are  greater  among  the  finely  bred  dogs  kept  in  large  kennels,  or  as 
pets,  whose  systems  are  weakened  by  in-and-in  breeding,  or  the  highly 
artificial  life  they  are  forced  to  lead.  Dogs  of  low  degree  are  susceptible 
to  the  malady,  but  rarely  succumb.  The  common  cur  when  attacked  re- 
tires for  a  few  days  under  the  first  available  house  or  porch,  to  reappear 


164  '  T—  DISTEMPER 

perhaps  a  little  thinner  and  more  careworn,  but  with  his  usual  indepen- 
dence and   aggressiveness. 

"The  disease  has  been  compared  to  typhoid  fever  in  man,  but  I  can 
see  but  little  analogy  between  them.  Distemper  is  an  infantile  disorder; 
typhoid  fever  is  not.  The  diseases  are  communicated  in  an  entirely  dif- 
ferent manner.  The  characteristic  lesion  of  typhoid  fever  is  a  congestion 
and  tumefaction  of  Pyer's  patches  (i.  e.,  small  collections  of  intestinal 
glands).  In  distemper  the  mucous  membrane  lining  the  bowels,  when 
the  alimentary  tract  is  the  seat  of  the  action  of  the  virus,  may  be  ulcerated 
along  its  entire  course,"  but  the  patches  of  Pyer  are  not  particularly  affected 
and  never  display  those  lesions  so  characteristic  of  typhoid. 

"Of  the  various  diseases  man  is  subject  to,  measles  most  closely  re- 
sembles distemper  in  dogs.  Both  are  infectious  infantile  disorders  trans- 
mitted through  similar  channels,  and  one  attack  successfully  overcome 
renders  immunity  from  a  second  through  the  course  of  the  animal's  life, 
with  but  a  few  exceptions.  Catarrhal  symptoms,  pulmonary  complications 
and  dysentery  are  common  to  both;  convulsions  also  appear  in  both  measles 
and  distemper;  and  finally  the  principal  characteristic  of  measles,  viz:  the 
rash,  which  develops  on  the  face  coincident  with  the  disease,  spreading 
in  twenty-four  hours  to  all  parts  of  the  body,  resembles  the  rash  and 
pinkish  prickly  condition  of  the  skin  noticeable  in  some  cases  of  distemper 
in  the  first  stages,  and  the  pimples  that  break  out  along  the  back  and 
under  the  belly  and  thighs,  and  the  dandruff  and  desquamation  of  the 
cuticle  in  the  latter  stages  of  distemper. 

"The  cause  of  distemper  has  been  and  is  a  subject  that  has  been  dis- 
cussed and  disagreed  upon  by  authorities  and  breeders  of  experience  in  a 
very  interesting  manner.  Some  hold  to  the  opinion  that  it  may  arise 
spontaneously,  or  as  a  result  of  damp,  cold,  poorly  ventilated  kennels, 
defective  drainage,  exposure,  general  neglect,  improper  putrescent  food 
and  other  anti-hygienic  conditions.  More  modern  writers  hold  tenaciously 
to  the  germ  theory,  discarding  altogether  and  scoffing  at  the  theory  of 
spontaneity  as  being  based  solely  upon  negative  evidence  and  insist  that  the 
disease  arises  and  exists  solely  as  a  result  of  infection  of  the  system  by 
the  specific  virus  or  contagion  of  distemper,  and  claim  the  earlier  ideas 
of  spontaneous  origin  are  based  solely  upon  failure  to  account  for  the 
disease  by  infection,  and  to  observe  and  appreciate  the  remarkable  vitality 
of  the  germ  and  the  ease  and  innumerable  channels  by  which  it  can  be 
transmitted  from  an  infected  animal  to  one  that  was  to  all  intents  com- 
pletely isolated. 

"In  the  face  of  recent  scientific  investigation  and  discoveries,  and  in 
a  disease  so  specifically  contagious  as  distemper,  it  is  impossible  to  discard 
the  germ  theory.  The  distinctive  microbe  which  causes  the  disease — pro- 
bably a  bacillus — has  not  been  isolated;  but  the  virus  has  been  cultivated, 
and  in  the  seventh  generation  will  produce  the  disease  when  inoculated 
in  dogs,  and  still  further  attenuations  of  the  virus  will  produce  the  disease 
in  a  mild  form  which  affords  the  animal  protection  from  future  attacks. 
These  experiments,  while  not  successful  in  all  ways,  point  conclusively  to 
the  fact  that  it  is  only  a  question  of  time  when  this  disease  will  be  as 
successfully   inoculated   against   as   smallpox   is   in   the   human   family. 

"Most  dog  breeders  are  firm  in  the  conviction  that  they  have  had  cases 
arise  spontaneously,  and  the  rapid  dissemination  the  disease  works  under 
anti-hygenic  surroundings  will,  as  a  more  intimate  knowledge  of  the  life 
and  manner  in  which  specific  disease  producing  micro-organisms  operate, 
entitle  hygienic  surroundings,  such  as  food,  light  and  air,  to  an  equal 
footing  with  the  morbid  poison  so  far  as  the  severity  or  mortality  of  the 
disease   is   concerned. 

"Germs  and  microbes  of  various  kinds,  capable  of  producing  specific 
diseases,  are  found  everywhere  in  earth,  air  and  water.  All  animals  swal- 
low them  in  their  food,  breathe  them  into  their  lungs  in  countless  num- 
bers, and  the  body  is  at  all  times  in  contact  with  them,  nevertheless  they 
produce  no  disturbance  of  the  system.  In  experiments  microbes  introduced 
Into   the   blood   of   healthy   animal*   were   Inactive,   whereas   if   the   same 


OLD  ENGLISH 

W^^ 

SHEEP  DOGS 

fL' 

4 

Property  of 

I!*  v»k     > 

MRS.  WILBUR  KIRBY  HITCHCOCK 

MAPLE  FARM 

Mt.  Washington,  Mass. 

1  ^BBMvJ  Bo  i  - 

Young  Stock  Usually  for  Sale 

sfc^f^^Bfi 

i^aJife 

Posl    Office  Addrr*. 

• 

ALANDAR 

■  -      -     , . 

Berkshire  Co.  Mass. 


FROUZY  BOBBIE"   (171072)   At  Stud 


TOKIO  KENNELS 


Japanese  Spaniels  and  Pekingese  Puppies 

FROM   $50.00   UP 

CHOICE  SPECIMENS  ONLY 

Mrs.  L.  E.  DOEVILER.  new  London,  conn. 


166  DISTEMPER 

an'mal  became  impoverished  and  weakened  through  foul  air,  impure  food 
or  water,  or  defective  elimination,  the  blood  became  impure  or  loaded 
with  decomposed  matter;  and  an  appropriate  pabulum  was  created  in 
which  the  germs  lived,  multiplied  and  set  up  their  specific  morbid  action 
to  the  detr.ment  and  possible  destruction  of  the  economy.  The  natural 
ccnclus  en  is  that  while  the  specific  germ  is  necessary  for  the  production 
of  a  specific  disease,  it  is  equally  essential  that  the  system  be  in  such  a 
condition  as  to  afford  a  proper  pabulum  for  the  reproduction,  which  is 
necessary  for  its  specific  action,  otherwise  it  would  be  overcome  by  the 
economy  and  eliminated  from  the  system;  just  as  grains  of  wheat  reproduce 
ihemseives  and  are  potent  under  proper  conditions  of  earth,  air,  water  and 
heat,  or  are  inert  and  disintegrate  when  thier  surroundings  are  unsuitable. 
"Germs  do  not  at  all  times  attack  the  same  organs  and  membranes. 
But  the  discharge  from  the  particular  set  affected  contains  the  virus  in  its 
most  concentrated  form.  This  accounts  for  the  dread  breeders  have  formed, 
through  experience,  of  the  nasal  discharges  of  an  affected  animal,  and  for 
the  v'gorous  objection  frequently  raised  at  a  dog  show  by  some  veteran 
owner  who  has  observed  a  careless  attendant  allowing  the  dogs  to  drink 
from  a  bucket  he  is  carrying  from  stall  to  stall  instead  of  filling  the  dogs' 
pans.  * 

"Distemper  is  not  transmissible  to  man,  but  is  to  cats,  wolves,  foxes, 
jackals,  hyenas  and  monkeys;  and  as  is  the  case  in  many  highly  conta- 
gious diseases,  one  attack  successfully  overcome  with  but  few  exceptions 
renders  immunity  from  a  second  attack  of  the  malady.  One  of  the  theo- 
ries advanced  as  an  explanation  of  this  fact  is  that  in  contagious  diseases 
the  specific  poison  combines  with  some  chemical  constituent  of  the  sys- 
tem which  is  essent'al  to  the  production  of  the  disease,  and  that  after 
tlrs  constituent  has  been  destroyed — as  it  will  be  through  combining  with 
the  germ- — and  the  animal  has  recovered  It  is  impossible  for  the  germ  to 
produce  system'c  disturbances  again  because  the  constituent  necessary  for 
its  combination   is  absent  from  the  system. 

"There  are  innumerable  channels  through  which  a  dog  may  be  infected 
with  distemper.  The  germ  is  of  remarkable  vitality,  and  is  conveyed 
through  the  air  or  on  a  person's  clothes,  or  a  dog  which  has  already  had 
the  disease  can  convey  the  germ  in  its  coat  from  a  sick  dog  to  a  well  one. 
The  use  of  kennels,  feeding  dishes,  or  shipping  crates  that  have  been 
previously  used  by  an  affected  animal  are  common  modes  of  inoculation. 
Dog  shows  are  a  fertile  source  of  the  spread  of  the  disease,  and  no  matter 
how  carefully  the  portable  benching  has  been  cleaned  and  disinfected  it  is 
always  more  or  less  a  conveyance  for  the  germs  that  produce  the  disease. 
"The  popular  fallacy  of  a  meat  diet  being  productive  of  distemper 
is  entirely  at  variance  with  all  scientific  knowledge,  as  all  carnivorous 
animals  are  markedly  free  from  specific  germ   diseases. 

"The  morbid  poison  of  distemper  attacks  dogs  in  different  ways,'  but 
breeders  and  pract;ticners  as  a  rule  recognize  as  typical  only  those  cases 
in  wh'ch  the  virus  affects  the  mucous  membranes  of  the  eyes  and  nasal 
passage  and  produces  a  catarrhal  discharge.  In  some  cases  the  intestinal 
tract  is  the  particu'ar  field  upon  which  the  virus  exerts  itself;  or  the 
liver  mav  be  affected,  or  the  bronchial  tubes."  But  the  action  of  the  virus 
that  i?  least  understood,  and  the  symptoms  most  commonly  ascribed  to 
some  other  cause,  is  when  it  is  concentrated  upon  the  brain  and  ner- 
vous system,  the  animal  dying  from  collapse  without  any  premonitory 
s  mptoms  or  developing  epileptic  spasms  and  convulsions,  and  other 
symptoms  that  the  breeder  ascribes  to  worms;  and  the  puppy  is  dosed 
accord  ngly.  I  have  lnd  such  cases  in  my  own  experience  as  a  breeder, 
a  d  mv  attention  has  been  frequently  called  to  this  condition  of  things 
bv  others  whose  puppies  have  died  in  from  a  few  hours  to  a  week  with 
all  th?  svmptoms  of  worm-fits,  careful  dissection,  however,  failing  to  reveal 
th  presence  of  th<*se  pests  or  any  other  exciting  cause;  and  distemper, 
from  an  absence  of  all  catarrhal  and  febril  symptoms,  would  be  the  last 
thing  thought  of. 

"An  attack  of  distemper  of  the  ordinary  catarrhal  form  is  usually  pre- 


DISTEMPER  167 

ceded  by  listlessness  and  loss  of  appetite;  the  animal  avoids  the  light 
and  courts  solitude;  all  the  symptoms  of  a  common  cold  will  then  mani- 
fest themselves  rapidly,  as  sneezing,  a  dry  husky  cough  and  a  watery 
discharge  from  the  eyes  and  nose;  the  animal  shivers,  seeks  warmth  and 
is  feverish,  the  pulse  rang.ng  from  one  hundred  and  twenty  to  one  hundred 
and  fifty  beats  per  minute;  the  nose  is  hot  and  dry,  the  lining  of  the 
eye  reddened,  and  the  small  veins  that  radiate  through  the  white  portion 
are  injected  with  blood;  the  tongue  is  coated,  the  secretion  of  saliva  is  dim  n- 
ished,  thiist  is  excessive,  food  is  rejected  and  prostiation  is  well  marked 
and  so  rapid  that  at  the  end  of  a  week  the  dog  can  hardly  stand;  the  bowels 
are  irregular;  in  the  early  stages  of  the  disease  there  is  a  tendency  to  con- 
stipation, but  the  matter  in  the  intestines-  through  failure  to  digest  sets 
up  an  irritation,  and  the  discharges  are  more  frequent  and  looser  than  in 
health,  and  the  feces  are  dark  colored  and  fetid.  The  discharges  from  the 
eyes  and  nose  become  purulent,  the  nostrils  are  covered,  with  a  glassy, 
yellowish  fluid,  the  cough  increases  in  frequency,  the  bronchial  tubes  fill 
with  mucus,  which  is  coughed  up,  giving  temporary  relief;  the  animal  vomits 
frothy  yellow  matter  and  is  unable  to  retain  food  upon  the  stomach;  the 
eyelids  become  glued  together,  resulting  in  blinding  the  patient;  breathing 
is  obstructed  by  matter  in  the  nostrils;  the  breath  becomes  fetid  and  has  a 
smell  that  is  peculiar  to  the  disease;  the  lips  are  covered  with  ulcers,  and 
the  animal  either  becomes  weaker  and  weaker  and  finally  succumbs,  or  at 
the  end  of  twelve  or  fourteen  days  the  symptoms  mentioned  above  abate 
in  intensity  and  the  animal  slowly  retails  its  strength.  Complications, 
however,  frequently  develop  early  in  the  disease,  and  result  in  the  death 
of  the  animal. 

"One  of  the  complications  of  distemper  is  pneumonia,  or  inflammation 
of  the  lungs,  brought  on  by  exposure  to  cold  or  by  a  weakened  heart  action. 
The  animal  will  not  lie  down,  but  assumes  a  sitting  position  with  the  fore- 
legs braced  and  separated,  the  head  hangs  heavily,  breathing  is  labored, 
lapid  and  heavy,  and  upon  application  of  the  ear  to  the  chest,  a  dry  cracking 
sound  will  be  heard  similar  to  that  made  when  walking  upon  dry  snow 
with   a   clean   boot. 

"Epileptic  fits  are  another  complication,  These  as  a  rule  come  on 
suddenly.  There  is  a  slight  quivering  of  the  muscles  of  the  face,  and 
an  anxious  look  around,  a  few  staggering  steps,  and  the  animal  falls  upon 
its  side  and  loses  consciousness;  the  face  becomes  distorted,  the  limbs 
work  violently,  and  there  is  a  continued  champing  of  the  jaws  as  well 
fts  a  frothy  mucus  coming  from  the  mouth;  the  head,  limbs  and  body 
jerk  violently,  the  convulsions  gradually  become  less  and  less,  though 
sometimes  the  animal  comes  out  of  them  suddenly  and  appears  dazed  and 
scared,  and  will  attempt,  to  hide  in  some  out  of  the  way  place. 

"Vomiting  and  purging  are  prominent  complications,  and  sometimes 
there  is  true  dysentery  in  which  the  feces  are  streaked  with  blood. 

"In  summing  up  this  disease  and  arriving  at  a  proper  treatment  we 
must  be  rn'ndful  of  the  fact  that  all  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  are  the 
direct  results  of  a  morbid  virus  existing  in  the  system,  and  that  the  course 
it  runs,  although  indefinite,  is  nevertheless  certain,  and  the  a'm  should 
be  directed  not  only  at  the  disease,  but  at  sustaining  the  system  so  as  to 
enable  it  to  withstand  the  debilitating  effects  of  the  virus  and  the  febrile 
condition  it  gives  rise  to.  The  promiscuous  administrations  of  exhaust- 
ing and  dangerous  medicines,  such  as  many  dog  owners  and  veterinar- 
ians are  to  indulge  in,  cannot  be  too  highly  condemned. 

"Warm  quarters,  good  care  and  nursing  are  the  prime  factors  in  the 
successful  treatment  of  this  disease.  Judicious  medical  treatment  is  of 
unquestionable  service  in  hold'ng  the  disease  in  check,  a'laviating  alarm- 
ing symptoms,  preventing  destructive  complication  and  hastening  convales- 
cence. But  no  matter  how  skillfully  applied  it  will  be  without  ava;l  if 
the  nursing  and  attendance  are  neglected,  whereas,  many  dogs,  properly 
cared  for,  make  nice  recoveries  without  medical  assistance.  Place  the 
patient  in  warm,  comfortable  quarters,  absolutely  free  from  drafts;  see 
that  his  bedding  is  changed,  daily,  and  all  discharge  from  the  nose  and 


168  DISTEMPER 

eyes  sponged  away  as  gently  as  possible  with  warm  water,  bo  as  not  to 
disturb  the  patient.  The  food  offered  should  be  highly  nutritious  and 
easily  digestible,  such  as  beef  tea  or  mutton  broth  thickened  with  rice  or 
well  boiled  oatmeal.  The  feeding  dishes  and  drinking  pans  must  be 
scrupulously  clean,  as  dirty  pans  will  nauseate  a  sick  animal  and  destroy 
what  little  appetite  it  may  have.  Scraped  raw  beef  is  very  nutritious 
and  can  be  mixed  with  gelatine;  a  dog  will  frequently  eat  this  when  it 
will  refuse  everything  else.  "When  the  appetite  fails  altogether  and  the 
animal  refuses  to  eat,  food  must  be  forced  down  its  throat  at  least  four 
times  a  day.  For  this  use  beef  extracts  or  beef  tea  with  the  addition  of  a 
raw  egg,  a  cupful  at  a  time  four  times  a  day  for  a  fifty-pound  dog;  and 
if  that  quantity  irritates  the  stomach  it  must  be  divided  and  given  oftener. 
If  the  patient  becomes  very  weak  a  little  sherry  or  brandy  must  be  given 
in  milk  punches  to  keep  up  the  general  strength. 

"In  the  first  stage  of  the  disease  the  bowels  are  generally  irregular, 
due  to  the  accumulation  of  undigested  matter  in  the  intestines;  it  is  ad- 
visable to  move  this  by  a  dose  of  castor  oil,  varying  in  quantiy  from  a  tea- 
spoonful  for  a  small  dog  to  an  ounce  and  a  half  for  a  large  dog. 

"After  this  has  operated  the  most  useful  drug  I  have  found  for  rati- 
fying the  system  against  the  ravages  of  the  poison  and  checking  what 
would  otherwise  be  a  severe  attack  is  hyposulphite  of  soda.  The  particular 
property  of  this  drug  either  within  or  without  the  system  is  to  destroy  fer- 
ments and  bacteria,  and  experiments  have  conclusively  proven  its  benefits 
in  all  diseases  where  morbid  poisons  are  at  work.  Blood  drawn  from  dogs 
that  have  been  given  thirty  grains  a  day  for  five  days  kept  fresh  for  three 
weeks;  the  blood  of  dogs  similarly  treated  with  the  exception  of  not  having 
the  sulphate  became  putrid  in  three  or  four  days.  Dogs  that  had  re- 
ceived the  sulphite  in  thirty  grain  dosps  with  their  food  for  five  days  and 
were  then  injected  with  fetid  pus  or  the  purulent  discharge  from  a  glan- 
dered  horse  reeled,  tottered,  and  were  unable  to  walk  for  a  few  hours, 
but  at  the  end  of  five  davs  recovered  their  health  and  appetite,  the  wound 
where  the  injection  had  been  made  healing  nicely.  Dogs  treated  similarly 
in  every  way  with  the  exception  of  not  having  previously  received  the 
hyposulphite  died  in  from  the  fourth  to  the  sixth  day  with  a  purulent  dis- 
charge from  the  eyes  and  nostrils,  and  the  point  where  the  injection  was 
made  became  gangrenous.  The  dose  of  this  drug  is  from  two  to  twenty 
grains,  depending  upon  the  age  and  size  of  the  patient,  and  the  condition 
of  the  bowels;   if  they  become  too  loose  the  dose  must  be  decreased. 

"Quinine  Is  another  drug  of  great  value  in  the  treatment  of  distemper 
and  all  febrile  conditions.  Its  use  is,  however,  abused  from  a  failure  to 
understand  its  real  action!  as  a  rule  too  large  doses  are  given  and  at  too 
frequent  intervals.  The  action  of  quinine,  besides  lowering  temperature 
and  pulsation,  is  in  small  doses  tonic  and  stimulating,  increasing  the 
apnetite  and  all  digestive  secretions;  in  large  doses  continued  it  is  de- 
pressing and  destrovs  the  appetite.  It  has  remarkable  antiseptic  proner- 
ti>s,  attacking  and  destroying  all  pernicious  micro-organisms.  A  full  dose 
(five  grains  for  a  St.  Bernard)  given  at  the  first  sign  of  lassitude  and  de- 
fection of  nremonitorv  svmptoms  of  an  attack  of  distemper,  while  it  mav 
Tint  prevpnt  the  disease,  will  certainly  moderate  it.  Its  use  should 
then  be  discontinued  until  the  fifth  or  sixth  day  of  the  disease,  when 
small  doses  of  from  one  to  five  grains  should  be  given  three  times  a  day, 
but  discontinued  if  any  signs  of  disagreeing  with  the  dog  are  shown. 

"Pulmonary  complications  can  be  relieved  bv  applying  hot  flannels  to 
the  sides  or  the  use  of  hot  water  bags.  Hot  fomentations  or  bandages 
wrung  out  of  warm  water  do  more  harm  than  good,  as  the  animal  gen- 
erally gets  chilled  while  they  are  being  used. 

"Nitrate  of  potash  may  be  given  in  the  dog's  drinking  water  or  in 
s'x  to  fifteen  grain  doses;  it  reduces  fever  and  stimulates  the  action  of  the 
kidneys. 

"If  the  pulse  and  temperature  are  very  high  a  few  doses  of  veratrum 
can  be  given  with  advantage,  but  not  continued  for  more  than  two  daya. 


DISTEMPER  169 

The  dose  is  from  one-tenth  to  one-third  of  a  grain  of  the  powder,  at  in- 
tervals of  three  or  four  hours. 

"Epileptic  fits  and  nervous  symptoms  are  difficult  to  treat  with  any 
degree  of  success  during  the  course  of  the  disease.  If  they  are  due  to 
reflex  action,  as  from  the  patient  cutting  teeth,  lance  the  gums;  if  due  to 
worms,  the  system  is  generally  too  debilitated  to  stand  the  powerful  drugs 
necessary  to  remove- or  destroy  these  pests.  The  patient,  however,  can  be 
temporarily  relieved  by  bromide  in  doses  of  from  five  to  twenty  grains, 
four  or  five  times  a  day,  either  in  a  capsule  or  a  watery  solution.  If  the 
excitement  is  extreme  the  bromide  can  be  combined  with  from  three  to 
ten  grains  of  chloral.  The  latter  drug,  when  administered,  should  be  mixed 
with   syrup   of  mucilage  to   prevent  its  irritating  the  throat. 

"Vomiting  should,  if  possible,  be  prevented  by  carefully  selecting 
those  foods  that  ihe  stomach  seems  best  able  to  digest,  but  if  it  is  so 
irritable  as  to  expel  the  most  easily  digested  foods,  give  from  two  to  four 
drops  of  Scheele's  strength  of  hydrocyanic  acid,  combined  with  from  two 
to  eight  grains  of  pepsin,  which  will  relieve  the  irritability  of  the  digestive 
organs   and   stop    the   vomiting. 

"Diarrhea  must  not  be  too  hurriedly  checked,  unless  the  discharges  are 
so  frequent  as  to  debilitate  the  animal.  In  mild  cases  give  paregoric  in  from 
one-half  to  two  teaspoonful  doses,  and  if  that  is  not  effectual  a  mixture 
of  from  five  to  ten  grains  of  chalk  and  from  five  to  fifteen  drops  of  ether 
and  laudanum  may  be  given  in  a  little  milk  or  soup. 

"In  arriving  at  the  proper  close  of  the  various  drugs  I  have  recom- 
mended, the  minimum  dose  is  suitable  for  clogs  weighing,  when  developed, 
from  fifteen  to  thirty  pounds,  and  the  maximum  is  for  clogs  that  will  weigh 
in  the  vicinity  of  one  hundred  pounds.  Larger  or  smaller  animals  should 
have  the  dose  correspondingly  increased  or  decreased,  as  the  case  may  be. 
Puppies  six  months  of  age  will  stand  half  the  dose  given  a  grown  animal 
of  the  same  breed,  and  for  puppies  under  six  months  a  corresponding  di- 
minution of  the  dose  must  be  made. 

"In  conclusion  I  again  desire  to  caution  the  owner  against  exposing 
puppies  to  cold  during  the  course  of  the  disease,  or  when  the  patient  begins 
to  convalesce.  Frequently  in  cases  of  distemper  a  very  decided  improve- 
ment in  the  condition  of  the  patient  will  be  observed,  and  the  owner  cor- 
respondingly elated  and  encouraged  by  a  spring-like,  sunny  day,  particu- 
larly if  the  weather  has  been  previously  damp  and  stormy,  he  will  admit 
the  puppy  to  the  kennel  yard  for  breath  of  fresh  air.  The  puppy  in  most 
cases,  after  blinking  at  the  sun  and  stretching,  will  select  the  dampest  spot 
that  the  sun  strikes  in  the  kennel  yard  and  curl  itself  up.  A  few  moment's 
exposure  under  these  conditions  is  sufficient,  and  the  next  morning  the  old 
symptoms,  with  incerased  severity,  are  present,  or  the  little  fellow's  la- 
bored breathing  indicates  too  plainly  the  fatal  inflammation  and  conges- 
tion of  the  lungs." 

The  following  is  valuable  on  this  disease:  A.  J.  Sewell,  M.  D.  C.  V.  S., 
who  has  lately  been  appointed  veterinarian  surgeon  to  the  King  of  Eng- 
land, gives  the  following  advice  regarding  the  spreading  of  distemper: 

"As  distemper  just  now  seems  particularly  prevalent,  and  the  largo 
shows  recently  held  are  sure  to  increase  the  number  of  cases,  this  article 
will  assist  readers  in  recognizing  the  disease  at  the  commencement,  so  that 
the  infected  animal  may  be  isolated  early,  and  thus  prevent,  if  possible,  the 
spread  of  the  disease  to  other  dogs,  especially  young  puppies,  which  have 
always  a  very  poor  chance  of  recovering. 

"I  know  some  few  people,  if  they  get  a  case  of  distemper  in  their 
kennels,  take  no  means  of  preventing  it  spreading;  on  the  contrary,  I  have 
heard  them  say  that  they  let  all  those  puppies  which  have  not  had  the 
disease  come  purposely  in  contact  with  the  sick, one,  so  as  to  let  all  those 
have  it  that  will,  and  get  over  it  for  the  time  being.  I  must  confess  this 
is  not  my  practice  with  my  own  dogs;  on  the  contrary,  I  take  every  possible 
precaution  T  can  to  prevent  them  having  it,  and  I  know  most  breeders  are 
as  ^anxious   as   myself   (o  avoid   it. 

"As  shows  are  no  doubt   the  greatest  source  of  spreading   distemper, 


170  DISTEMPER 

I  advise  that  all  clogs  coming  from  these  places  which  have  not  had  the 
disease  should  not  be  returned  home  if  there  is  any  young  stock  in  the 
kennels  that  one  does  not  wish  to  be  infected,  and  the  farther  they  are 
kept  away  the  better.  Not  only  is  this  necessary,  but  a  separate  attendant 
is  required.  If  you  have  the  same  man,  you  may  as  well  have  the  same 
kennel.  If  these  suggestions  are  adopted  there  will  not  be  the  least  danger 
of  the  disease  spreading,  and  I  feel  pretty  sure,  if  people  would  properly 
isolate  all  distemper  cases  the  disease  might  be  almost,  if  not  entirely, 
eradicated    from    the   country. 

"The  first  symptom  of  distemper  is  a  rise  of  temperature — if  a  dog 
is  dull  and  off  his  food,  take  his~"temperature.  It  is  best  to  take  it  in  the 
rectum,  where  the  normal  is  about  one  hundred  and  one  to  one  hundred 
and  one  and  one-half  degrees  Fahrenheit;  if  taken  under  the  arm  or  inside 
the  thigh  it  is  one  degree  lower.  If  the  thermometer-  registers  two  or 
three  degrees  of  temperature  above  normal  you  may  be  sure  there  is  some- 
thing wrong,  and  the  dog  should  be  isolated  at  once;  and  by  doing  this  the 
infection  may  often  be  prevented  spreading.  If  the  disease  is  distemper 
other  symptoms  will  soon  develop,  as  a  husky  cough,  loss  of  appetite  and 
condition,  and  occasionally  vomiting.  The  eyes  are  weak  and  sensitive  to 
light,  and  there  is  often  a  little  gummy  discharge  which  collects  along  the 
edges  of  the  lids;  the  breath  is  offensive,  and  the  teeth  become  furred. 
Diarrhea  may,  or  may  not,  occur.  If  the  illness  is  only  some  passing  ail- 
ment the  temperature  will  soon  be  normal,  and  the  dog  assume  his  usual 
condition.  But  the  temperature,  even  in  distemper,  after  two  or  three 
days,  may  go  down  to  normal;  but  do  not  be  deceived  by  this,  and  think 
the  dog  is  all  right,  but  look  out  for  some  of  the  other  symptoms  men- 
tioned, and  if  the  dog  is  in  for  that  disease  they  are  sure  to  appear,  and 
the  fever  will  return  again  in  a  couple  of  days  or  so. 

"People  often  think  a  dog  cannot  have  distemper  without  there  is  a 
discharge  from  the  nose;  this  is  a  mistake,  but  it  certainly  does  occur 
in  most  cases,  though  it  does  not  appear  as  a  rule  until  the  dog  has  been 
ill  for  some  time.  If  the  lungs  become  affected  the  breathing  is  short 
and  quick,  not  panting  with  the  mouth  open,  the  chest  is  tender  on  pres- 
sure. At  first  there  is  no  cough,  but  after  two  or  three  days  there  is  a 
suppressed  painful  cough,  with  retching.  The  pulse  is  often  much  acceler- 
ated, the  beats  varying  from  one  hundred  and  ten  to  one  hundred  and 
forty  per  minute.  In  some  cases  the  pulse  is  very  slow,  and  may  only 
be  forty-eight  to  the  minute;  of  course,  this  refers  to  a  big  dog.  A  pulse 
of  this  kind  is  worse  than  a  fast  one  with  pneumonia.  When  it  is  between 
sixty  and  seventy  in  a  small  dog  it  is  also  serious  with  lung  complications. 
The  heart's  action  in  dogs  is  very  frequently  intermittent  even  in  health. 
The  eyes  during  distemper  are  often  a  source  of  anxiety,  and  in  those  dogs 
with  prominent  orbits,  as  spaniels,  pugs,  etc.,  there  is  always  a'n  inclination 
for  ulcers  to  form,  which  are  extremely  painful." 

The  following  was  written  by  "Westerner"  and  published  in  Field 
and  Fancy.  We  cannot  know  too  much  on  this  most  dreaded  disease  so  I 
give   the   article   entire: 

Distemper  in  Dogs. 

"Each  year  brings  around  its  popular  dog  shows,  and  in  these  days 
when  nothing  is  thought  of  high  prices  being  paid  for  good  specimens  in 
most  all  the  breeds,  many  of  which  after  winning  fame  in  public  competition 
succumb  to  distemper,  the  American  pulic  is  in  need  of  some  sound  advice, 
which  will,  if  faithfully  followed,  save  the  lives  of  innumerable  dogs.  It 
is  said  (hat  whoever  discovers  a  sure  specific  cure  for  distemper  in  dogs 
will  have  made  his  fortune,  for  probably  60  per  cent  of  all  the  thorough- 
bred dogs  bred  annually  die  of  this  dread  disease,  at  periods  generally 
following  the  large  shows  in  Eastern  cities.  The  following  practical  sug- 
gestions and  observations  based  upon  the  experience  of  many  years  .of 
breeding  and  raising,  are  likely  not  new  to  some  owners,  but  will  be  found 


DISTEMPER 


171 


most  helpful  by  the  yearly  increasing  number  of  novices,  and  result  in  an 
absolute  knowledge  of  how  to  avoid  fatal  results. 

"We  know  that  distemper  commonly  develops  during  the  first  year 
of  life,  either  at  periods  known  to  be  associated  with  teeth  formation  or 
approaching  physical  maturity. 

"Primarily,  distemper,  at  its  inception,  shows  a  disturbed  and  inflam- 
ed condition  of  the  membraneous  tissue  of  the  alimentary  canal.  It  is 
likely  a  condition  corresponding  to  typhoid,  as  some  maintain.  Its  germ 
certainly  finds  ready  cultivation  in  the  unhealthy  conditions  which  result 
from  worms.  Its  first  usual  symptom  is  a  hard  bronchial  cough,  with 
some  retching,  irritated  by  excitement  or  nervousness,  all  no  doubt  caused 
by  the  stomach's  disturbed  membraneous  condition.  Whether  at  two  or 
three  months,  or  at  six  or  ten  months,  or  any  age,  the  first  thing  to  do  when 
this  cough  appears  is  to  chain  the  dog  up  in  some  inside  quarters  where  air 
is  good  and  floor  dry.  Here  is  where  the  first  mistake  generally  takes  place. 
The  fond  owner,  thinking  because  the  dog  is  lively,  that  his  cough  is  noth- 
ing more  than  some  slight  throat  irritation  or  cold,  allows  the  dog  to  sleep 
out  in  all  kinds  of  weather,  which  conditions  soon  develop  acute  bronchial 
troubles,  generally  pneumonia,  and  in  most  every  case  pneumonia  is  fatal 
in  dog-life. 

"Distemper  develops  much  slower  than  generally  thought  for.  A  dog 
is  first  noticed  to  be  'off  his  food;'  soon  the  cough  is  noticed  in  the  morning 
and  toward  night,  and  in  a  week  or  ten  days  it  is  more  than  likely  that 
the  eyes  show  a  sticky  discharge  and  the  nose  sooner  or  later  begins  per- 
haps to  discharge  likewise  thick  purulent  yellow  mucus.  Many  a  strong 
healthy  dog  will  not  show  the  effects  of  the  early  stages  of  the  disease, 
but  later  break  down  all  at  once,  as  it  gradually  increases  to  some  climax 
with  him.  If  the  mucous  discharge  stage  is  reached,  the  owner  can  count 
on  a  month  or  more  of  close  confinement. 


PURE  food  is  the  dog's  greatest  need.  The 
foremost  veterinarians  agree  that  nearly 
all  ordinary  dog  troubles  are  traceable  to  impro- 
per feeding.  Foods  manufactured  from  waste 
products  and  scraps  are  not  proper  foods. 

We  take  pride  in  the  fact  that  Maltoid 
Milk-Bone  dog  and  puppy  foods  are  made  on 
the  same  principles  of  purity,  wholesomeness 
and  good  flavor  as  foods  for  humans. 

Samples  and  interesting  literature  mailed 
free  on  request. 

F.  H.  BENNETT  BISCUIT  CO.,  NEW  YORK 

BENNETT'S. 


172  DISTEMPER 

"Of  great  importance  is  the  isolation  of  the  patient,  chained  up  free 
from  activity  and  excitement  from  other  dogs.  If  your  puppy  is  young, 
and  you  have  an  old  bitch  (that  has  had  the  distemper),  no  harm  can 
follow  shutting  her  in  with  the  patient.  She  will  aid  the  puppy  in  keeping 
clean  and  be  very  helpful  in  quieting  him.  Your  chances  are  that  if  this 
first  move  is  made  promptly,  and  faithfully  adhered  to,  your  dog  will  have 
but  a  'mild  case,'  and  thus  be  saved  all  of  the  deleterious  effects  of  the 
ravages  of  the  disease  in  its  worst  forms,  and  in  a  couple  of  weeks  be  over 
it.  The  dog  that  is  kept  chained  up  from  the  very  first  symptoms,  stores 
up  his  vital  energy  and  strength,  and  has  the  benefit  of  it  when  any  climax 
of  the  disease  develops. 

"In  treatment,  the  writer  does  not  believe  in  the  speedy  use  of  any 
medicine;  the  less  used  the  better  you  are  off,  and  the  clog,  generally. 
If  at  first  your  dog  is  suddenly  prostrated,  as  is  common,  one  good,  large 
dose  of  rochelle  salts  or  castor  oil  is  a  good  beginning.  If  indications  of 
worms  are  present  treat  for  their  removal.  If  the  patient  refuses  food  for 
a  couple  of  days,  it  will  do  no  harm  to  let  him  go  without,  but  rather 
good.  The  first  stage  is  no  time  to  force  food,  but  on  the  contrary,  does 
injury.  Should  much  mucous  discharge  develop  at  the  eyes  and  nose,  and 
a  general  fevered  condition  exist,  with  quick  breathing  and  much  loss 
of  energy,  quinine  in  moderate  doses,  or  any  tried  'grippe'  tablet  that 
has  been  found  good  in  family  use  will  prove  beneficial.  In  giving  any  such 
medicines  use  caution  as  to  overdosing,  considering  well  the  age  and  size 
of  the  patient,  and  not  oftener  than  once  in  three  or  four  hours,  bearing  in 
mind  its  irritating  effect  on  the  stomach  tissues.  The  condition  of  the  stom- 
ach is  the  most  important  factor  to  keep  in  mind,  for  on  getting  the  dog 
back  to  a  good  appetite  depends  his  recovery.  He  must  have  the  ability 
to  digest  and  assimilate  his  food,  as  well  as  to  eat  it,  in  order  that  its 
strength-giving  properties  can  help  overcome  the  deleterious  effects  of  the 
disease,  as  the  effect  of  this  foreign  germ  life  in  the  system  advances  in 
its  attack  on  the  system. 

"Right  here,  begin  at  once,  something  that  will,  if  followed  up  regu- 
larly, allay  the  development  of  the  worst  tendencies  of  the  disease.  After 
the  general  cleansing,  begin  to  give,  three  or  four  times  a  day  for  several 
days  and  continually  as  long  as  its  helpfulness  is  indicated  a  tablet  that 
can  be  purchased  from  any  druggist,  being  a  compound  of  pepsin  (one  or 
two  grains,  according  to  age),  bismuth  and  charcoal.  These  tablets  are 
inexpensive  and  should  be  given  after  each  meal,  if  the  patient  takes 
food,  and,  if  not,  four  times  a  day.  They  are  easily  taken  or  given,  and 
their  beneficial  effect  will  soon  be  observed.  They  will  soothe  the  inflamed 
membraneous  tissues  and  aid  the  proper  digestion  of  food  and  its  assimi- 
lation. 

"In  distemper,  the  feces  are  usually  of  a  greenish,  rank,-  pungent  char- 
acter, indicating  a  decidedly  unhealthy  condition  of  the  bowels,  in  the  cause 
of  which  both  stomach  indigestion  and  intestinal  indigestion  and  lack  of 
assimilation  undoubtedly  share.  This  condition,  if  allowed  to  remain  with- 
out attention  results  in  what  is  known  as  the  ulcerous  and  intestinal  form 
of  the  disease  which  commonly  develops  when  owners  are  too  anxious  to 
keep  their  clogs  eating  rich  food,  when  the  dog's  system  cannot  properly 
handle  it.  There  is  no  necessity  for  this  form  of  the  disease  ever  develop- 
ing.    It  is  its  worst  form  when  advanced,  and  results  in  most  cases  fatally. 

"These  simple  and  harmless  tablets  will  first  digest  the  food  and  en- 
able the  dos  to  assimilate  it.  They  soothe  and  tone  up  the  inflamed  intes- 
tinal conditions  and  gradually  make  a  dog's- appetite  good  again  and  slowly 
but  surelv  brins  about  the  conditions  which  permit  healthy,  well  formed 
feces.  When  this  is  accomplished  more  than  half  the  battle  is  fought,  for 
so  long  as  the  dog  is  running  off  in  a  diarrheal  condition  the  distemper 
germ  seems  to  thrive,  producing  all  sorts  of  gastrical  and  intestinal  trou- 
bles, which  are  difficult  to  cure.  Many  make  the  mistake  of  treating  with 
stringents  for  diarrhea,  which  naturally  only  cause  more  harm,  as  the  cause 
is  not  first  removed.  There  need  be  no  fear  whatever  in  the  moderate 
use  of  these  tablets,  for  they  can  produce  no  harmful  effects  whatever,  and 


DISTEMPER  /  172, 

even  should  they  be  given  without  sufficient  cause  therefor  existing,  they 
would  be  but  a  tonic  and  help  to  any  normal  conditions.  All  dogs  (espe- 
cially puppies)  are  prone  to  overeat,  bolt  their  food  and  tax  too  greatly 
their  digestive  organs.  Dogs  in  their  tramp  and  native  state  have  no  such 
troubles.  While  our  modern  blooded  breeding  has  given  us  unbroken 
lineage  in  fine  pedigrees,  the  dog  constitution,  due  perhaps  to  the  con- 
fined kennel  life  most  have  to  put  up  with,  is  not  as  vigorous  at  it  would 
otherwise  be.  Many  a  stud  dog  and  brood  bitch  hardly  ever  get  out  of  a 
kennel  yard!  need  it  be  wondered  at,  then,  that  the  blue-blooded  puppies 
inherit  digestive  organs  that  need  some  help  now  and  then,  and  are  sus- 
ceptible subjects  of  contagion  which  develops  at  most  shows?  Fresh  air 
and  nice  quarters  tend  to  produce  a  healthy  environment  in  a  kennel,  but 
as  the  young  puppie  adds  bone  and  tissue  much  faster  than  is  generally 
considered,  the  organs  that  are  responsible  for  this  growth,  great  in  pro- 
portion to  size  as  it  is,  and  speedy  development,  need  as  much  general 
support  as  it  is  possible  to  give  them. 

"If  your  patient  is  well  advanced  in  the  purulent  mucus  discharge  or 
acute  bronchial  stage,  before  you  get  at  him,  which  is  usual  in  the  exper- 
ience of  amateurs,  begin  at  once  and  conform  rigidly  to  treat  as  here- 
tofore suggested,  adding  the  possible  help  of  some  distemper  medicine. 
While  these  undoubtedly  when  properly  used  are  very  helpful,  they  are  at 
best  but  stimulating  tonics  and  fever  medicines,  and  it  is  well  to  have  on 
hand  whichever  one  you  find  gives  good  results.  Should  the  patient  show 
general  debility  and  indications  of  the  disease  rather  generally  poisoning 
the  system — in  fact,  if  the  nasal  form  develops,  lose  no  time  in  arranging 
to  put  in  a  seton.  Any  veterinary  can  do  it,  but  you  can  do  it  yourself 
fully  as  well,  as  follows:  Clip  the  hair  on  neck  back  of  skull  close  to  skin 
for  three  or  four  inches  square.  Secure  a  piece  of  ordinary  (tarred)  tar- 
paulin or  common  hemp  cord,  which  should  be  soaked  in  a  solution  of 
carbolic  acid  and  water.  Cut  cord  at  length  of  eight  or  ten  inches.  Catch 
one  end  of  it  in  the  joint  of  a  pair  of  small  curved  sharp-pointed  nail 
scissors  or  sail-cloth  needle;  hold  skin  just  below  occiput  of  skull  bone, 
well  up  away  from  inner  tissues  and  puncture  point  through  from  one 
side  of  neck  to  the  other,  drawing  cord  through  so  that  holes  will  be  about 
two  inches  apart;  tie  good  large  knots  in  each  end  of  cord,  dressing  at 
nrst  with  antiseptic  vaseline,  and  leave  it  in  for  from  five  to  ten  days, 
dependent  upon  profuseness  of  discharge.  Draw  cord  from  knot  to  knot 
each  day  often,  in  order  to  keep  outlet  free.  The  insertion  of  this  seton  is 
not  particularly  painful,  as  it  passes  through  the  outer  skin  covering  only, 
and  can  do  no  harm  whatever.  It  should  be  kept  as  clean  as  possible.  It 
acts  as  a  counter  irritant  and  drains  off  from  the  system  a  large  amount 
of  poisonous  accumulations  and  will  very  soon  relieve  the  head  of  the  acute 
troubles  there  concentrated. 

In  almost  all  cases  where  the  seton  is  used  soon  enough  its  aid  is 
largely  responsible  for  safe  recovery.  The  writer  has  seen  most  wonderful 
cures  by  its  assistance  in  the  last  stages  of  the  disease.  It  use  is  of  Eng- 
lish origin,  and  one  theory  advanced  to  explain  its  benefit  in  dogs  is  that 
as  a  dog  perspires  only  through  the  glands  of  nose  and  mouth,  and  never 
through  the  outer  skin  and  coat,  this  outlet  affords  an  immediate  drain 
much  needed  to  carry  off  the  poisonous  accumulations  about  the  inner  body 
tissues.  When  the  system  is  generally  much  poisoned  with  effects  of  dis- 
temper, this  drain  is  very  beneficial  and  never  harmful.  Leave  it  in  until 
the  discharge  begins  to  subside,  then  cut  one  end  of  the  cord  and  take 
it  out.  Keep  sore  clean  until  healed,  which  will  be  accomplished  within 
a  few  days,  and  in  a  month  a  new  growth  of  coat  will  have  covered  up 
the  effect  of  this  treatment,  so  that  no  scars  are  left  as  a  blemish  on  the 
patient's  neck. 

Many  dog  owners  have  special  food  theories  for  distemper,  a  popular 
delusion  being  that  meat  fed  to  young  dogs  produces  distemper.  All  young 
dogs  should  have  meat  in  moderation,  and  don't  forget  that  dogs  need  salt 
in  their  food,  as  well  as  the  human  race  and  animals.  The  frequent  con- 
tinual diet  absolutely  without  salt  is  sufficient  to  cause  most  any  kind  of 


174  i  DISTEMPER 

ailment.  The  writer's  observation  has  been  that  a  dog  in  distemper  gets 
along  best  when  given  limited  quantities  of  what  it  craves,  three  to  five 
times  daily,  always  bearing  in  mind  the  aim  to  make  the  stomach's  work 
easy.  Raw  (fresh)  beef  cut  fine  on  bread,  fed  three  or  four  times  daily, 
is  most  excellent.  If  milk  is  relied  upon,  sterilize  it  (rather  than  boil) 
and  give  in  moderate  quantities.  Raw  eggs  with  milk  is  generally  very 
good  and  strengthening.  Avoid  alcoholic  stimulants,  except  when  dog  is 
badly  off,  then  give  whiskey  and  quinine  as  tonic,  and  maybe  a  little  port 
wine  with  milk.  The  following  few  important  and  brief  "dont's"  will  aid 
some  as  occasional  reminders  and  cautions,  viz.: 

Don't  pour  food  down  a  sick  dog  when  he  hasn't  the  ability  to  either 
hold  or  digest  it.     It  only  makes  him  worse. 

Don't  exercise  a  dog  sick  with  distemper. 

Don't  let  a  day  pass  without  proper  use  of  compound  tablets  (pepsin, 
bismuth  and  charcoal). 

Don't  get  scared  if  your  dog  won't  eat.  It's  better  for  him  not  to  eat 
until  he  can  handle  his  food  rightly.     He  won't  die  of  starvation. 

Don't  allow  him  to  get  his  feet  wet.  This  is  likely  to  bring  on  pneu- 
monia, which  is  generally  fatal. 

Don't  wash  a  dog,  no  matter  how  foul  he  may  be,  when  down  with 
distemper  or  convalescent.  Brush,  comb  and  clean  with  powder  (flour). 
Many  a  dog  has  contracted  incurable  chorea  and  its  twitches  from  a  bath 
too  soon  after  distemper.  Keep  him  away  from  the  water  for  three  months 
at  least. 

Don't  let  your  dog  off  chain  as  soon  as  he  begins  to  feel  better.  Keep 
him  there  till  well,  leading  him  for  exercise  only  when  convalescent.  Re- 
lapses are  common  and  often  fatal. 

When  your  patient  is  once  well  over  distemper  you  can  risk  him  any- 
where, for  dogs  do  not  have  the  real  thing  but  once.  If  your  dog's  sys- 
tem is  left  very  much  run  down,  blood  tonics  are  good,  according  to  indi- 
vidual  needs,    Scott's    Emulsion    being   especially    beneficial. 

The  most  important  safeguards  to  bear  in  mind  are:  (1)  Absolute  quiet 
on  chain  in  dry  quarters.  (2)  Tablets  regularly  given  and  constant  care. 
(3)  The  seton  promptly  put  in  before  the  case  has  advanced  to  the  fatal 
or  acute  form  of  the  disease.  Distemper  in  itself  is  not  fatal,  but  the  com- 
plications and  collateral  developments  it  leads  to  are.  Whoever  faithfully 
follows  the  suggestions  given  in  this  article  need  have  no  fear  of  any  fatal 
results  from  distemper.  The  ideas  herein  formulated  are  but  the  result 
of  years  of  practical  experience  of  varying  results  with  young  setters. 
Common  sense  is  the  underlying  principle  of  it  all,  which  after  all,  if  used 
in  time,  is  far  better  than  medicine.  We  hear  of  all  kinds  of  "cures," 
including  those  who  still  have  faith  in  "coffee,"  the  pellet  of  "buckshot," 
or  dose  of  "gunpowder,"  together  with  other  harsher  specifics  and  meth- 
ods of  treatment.  Should  we  not  give  our  priceless  clogs,  whose  value 
every  year  is  increasing  with  their  educated  usefulness  and  close  com- 
panionableness,  the  benefit  of  up-to-date  intelligent  care,  rather  than  the 
"guess  at  it"  methods  of  the  past? 

"Modestly  submitted  for  the  benefit  of  somebody's  faithful  dog,  some- 
time,  somewhere." 

The  following  very  complete  and  exhaustive  article  on  Distemper  was 
written  especially  for  this  book  by  Dr.  George  W.  Clayton: 

Distemper. 

"History. — The  disease  now  known  as  canine  distemper  made  its  ap- 
pearance at  a  very  early  period.  According  to  Laosson,  it  was  known  at 
the  time  of  Aristotle,  and  the  epizootic  that  invaded  Bohemia  during  the 
year  1028  and  decimated  the  canine  species  of  that  country  is  now  known 
to  have  been  canine  distemper.  It  made  its  appearance  in  England  and 
on  the  Continent  of  Europe  during  the  Seventeenth  Century,  first  in  Spain, 
and  traveled  from  there  to  the  other  countries.  It  appeared  in  England 
and  France  about  1740,  in  Germany  in   1748,  in  Italy  about  1764,  and  in 


DISTEMPER 


17! 


Richwoods  Kennels,  IRISH   SETTERS 


CHAMPION  RICHWOODS  GLENROY,   (182911),  at  Stud.     A 

son  of  the  Famous  Ch.  PAT  LAW. 
WALTER  McROBERTS,  Peoria,  III.      Men.ber  Irish  Setter  Club  of  Amerif; 
Al.  G.  Eberhart  is  my  agent  at  A.  R.  C.  shows. 


Russia  in  1770.  Distemper  now  exists  all  over  the  world  wherever  the  dog 
is  found.  From  the  time  of  its  first  appearance  it  has  been  considered  one 
of  the  most  fatal  diseases  to  which  the  dog  is  subject. 

"Definition. — Distemper  is  an  acute  contagious  disease,  caused  by  the 
introduction  of  a  specific  poison  into  the  system.  It  has  been  known  under 
various  names.  Opinions  differ  as  to  its  nature.  Some  authors  have  com- 
pared it  to  typhoid  or  typhus  in  man,  others  to  variola.  A  number  of  dif- 
ferent authors  describe  it  as  a  catarrhal  fever,  as  it  affects  all  the  mem- 
branes of  the  body.  The  nervous  system  is  generally  if  not  always  involved, 
and  there  is  also  a   characteristic  skin   eruption. 

"Causes. — That  a  germ  constitutes  the  exciting  cause  of  distemper  we 
are  convinced  by  recent  investigations.  Some  authorities  believe  there  may 
be  several  germs  or  different  forms  of  the  same  germ.  As  the  disease  is 
very  highly  contagious,  clearly  defined,  and  well  characterized,  the  exis- 
tence of  a  specific  germ  must  be  conceded.  According  to  this  theory 
the  spontaneous  origin  of  distemper  is  not  tenable,  and  that  the  disease 
may  be  perpetuated  and  continued  in  existence,  there  must  be  a  continued 
propagation  of  the  poison,  and  a  continual  transmission  of  this  poison. 

"The  poison  exists  in  the  air  in  a  fixed  and  volatile  state,  and  enters 
the  system  by  the  nose  and  mouth. 

"The  virus  can  be  communicated  from  one  animal  to  another,  and 
transmission  by  cohabitation  is  more  easily  effected  than  by  inoculation. 

"The  germ  has  great  vitality  and  great  power  of  resistance.  It  may 
undergo  dessication  in  the  air  and  still  retain  its  virulence.  It  can  exist 
a  long  time  outside  the  body  without  destruction,  and  communicate  the 
disease  when  brought  into  contact  with  susceptible  individuals. 


170  —..-..-  DISTEMPER 

"It  has  been  found  that  the  virulent  properties  of  the  germs  are  not 
lost  in  any  degree  when  dried  at  a  normal  temperature,  or  when  exposed 
to  a  temperature  of  20  degrees  Centigrade,  but  does  lose  some  of  its  power 
if  preserved  in  a  dray  state  and  kept  for  any  length  of  time. 

"Under  proper  conditions  the  poison  of  distemper  can  reproduce  itself 
without  limit. 

"The  blood  of  the  affected  animal  has  been  found  to  be  contagious; 
also  the  secretions  from  the  eyes  and  nose. 

"Vaccination  of  young  animals  by  means  of  the  secretory  fluid  from 
animals  affected  with  the  disease  has  been  tried  and  has  produced  the  dis- 
ease artificially.  The  disease  when  produced  from  vaccination  generally 
runs  a  mild  course.  The  liability  of  dogs  to  contract  distemper  is  not  the 
same  at  all  ages,  and  under  all  circumstances  and  conditions.  Old  dogs 
have  a  greater  chance  of  escape,  this  being  more  a  disease  of  youth. 
Young  animals  generally  contract  the  disease  jn  the  course  of  their  first 
year.  Sometimes  whole  litters  of  puppies  being  carried  off  by  it.  Some 
animals  seem  to  possess  immunity  from  the  malady,  and  one  attack  suc- 
cessfully overcome  produces  immunity  from  another.  In  very  rare  cases 
there  are  exceptions  to  this  rule.  Distemper  is  found  in  all  localities,  and 
at  all  seasons,  in  the  country  it  may  be  more  rife  at  some  seasons  than 
others,  but  in  large  cities  it  exists  permanently. 

"Predisposing  Causes. — In  distemper,  as  in  all  similar  diseases,  there 
are  predisposing  causes.  Anything  that  weakens  the  constitution,  or  that 
tends  to  debilitate,  or  lessen  the  animal's  resisting  power  would  be  pre- 
disposing causes.  An  animal  that  has  a  weakened  constitution  inherited 
from  the  sire  or  dam,  from  any  cause,  for  instance  from  in-breeding,  in- 
judicious mating,  or  from  diseased  parents.  We  will  say,  then,  that  age, 
environment,  condition  of  the  constitution  at  the  time  of  exposure,  indi- 
viduality, etc:,  are  all  important.  The  sudden  alteration  in  the  environ- 
ment, like  a  change  of  weather,  or  of  feeding,  exposure  to  damp  and  cold, 
exhaustion,  a  long  journey,  the  exciting  and  unnatural  conditions  of  shows 
generally,  with  the  crowding  together  of  large  numbers  of  dogs  that  have 
lived  under  different  conditions,  etc.,  badly  drained,  ill-ventilated  kennels 
with  insufficient  disinfecting  and  feeding,  poor  food  or  over  feeding,  and 
too  little  exercise,  are  all  favorable  to  the  spread  of  the  disease. 

"Animals  Affected — Distemper  is  found  in  the  dog,  cat,  fox,  wolf, 
hyena,  prairie  dog  and  monkey. 

"Clinical  Symptoms. — Symptoms  of  canine  distemper  are  manifold  and 
rather  complicated.  They  involve  the  ocular,  respiratory  and  digestive  mu- 
cous membranes;  also  the  nervous  system  and  outer  integument  of  skin. 
For  the  purpose  of  description  we  will  divide  them  under  the  following 
different  heads: 

"Symptoms  of  Commencement. — The  period  of  incubation  is  usually 
from  four  to  fourteen  days.  Elevation  of  temperature  is  the  first  symptom 
noticeable  in  this  disease.  The  next  symptom  that  will  be  noticed  is  some 
disturbance  in  the  general  condition.  The  animal  will  seem  to  be  chilly 
and  have  shivering  spells,  the  nose  is  hot  and  dry,  the  skin  is  hard  and 
the  hair  becomes  harsh  and  dry.  The  animal  loses  his  appetite,  is  restless 
and  seems  depressed,  and  soon  tires  on  slight  exertion.  Vomiting  may 
occur. 

"Symptom  on  the  Outer  Integument. — There  is  sometimes  a  charac- 
teristic skin  eruption  in  distemper.  The  eruption  generally  occurs  on  the 
inner  facia  of  the  thighs,  and  on  the  abdomen,  or  it  may  cover  the  whole 
body.  It  first  appears  as  small  red  spots,  generally  scattered.  Sometimes, 
but  very  rarely,  they  are  confluent,  then  there  is  a  change  and  they  appear 
as  small  blisters  filled  with  serum,  and  later  on  this  changes  to  pus.  They 
are  about  the  size  of  a  small  bean,  then  dry  up  very  soon  and  form  yellow- 
ish scabs  and  crusts.  These  scabs  fall  off  and  leave  a  red,  circular  spot  on 
the  skin,  and  these  spots  are  some  time  in  disappearing.  Sometimes  pit 
and  ulcerations  are  formed,  on  account  of  the  dog  scratching  these  spots. 
Occasionally  this  trouble  is  only  slight  and  confined  to  parts  of  the  body, 
but  at  times  it  extends  over  the  whole  surface  of  th«  bodr.     When   the 


DISTEMPER  177 

trouble  is  very  extensive  there  is  a  fetid  odor  given  off  from  the  body,  the 
hair  falling  off  in  places.  Occasionally  a  slight  skin  eruption  is  the  only 
symptom  that  is  observed,  but  in  these  cases  the  disease  is  of  a  very  mild 
form. 

"Symptoms  Shown  by  the  Eyes. — In  the  majority  of  cases  there  is  a 
catarrhal  conjunctivitis.  The  eye  watery,  the  eyelids  injected,  the  con- 
junctiva is  red  and  swollen,  and  as  the  light  cause's  the  animal  pain  he 
seeks  the  dark.  At  first  the  exudate  is  serious,  later  on  it  becomes  mucous, 
and  still  later  on  it  becomes  purulent,  in  color  light  gray  or  yellowish.  This 
discharge  collects  in  the  corner  of  the  eye  or  runs  down  over  the  face, 
forms  yellowish  crusts  on  the  edges  of  the  eyelids,  and  very  frequently 
glues  the  lids  together  during  the  night.  Lesions  of  the  cornea  may  be 
caused  by  the  corrosive  action  of  the  secretion,  and  the  resulting  inflam- 
mation of  the  surrounding  membranes.  The  animal  scratching  and  rubbing 
the  parts  producing  further  injury.  Nutritive  troubles  which  follow  also 
assist.  There  is  at  first  a  slight  swelling  which  afterward  forms  an  ulcer- 
ation. After  this  process  has  ceased  and  healing  takes  place  there  is  left 
white  spots  or  dark  pigmentation  on»  the  cornea.  The  inflammation  may 
extend  when  the  whole  eye  becomes  acutely  inflamed  and  breaks  down. 
The  eye  symptom  accompanied  by  a  fever  is  sometimes  the  only  symptoms 
of  the  disease. 

"Respiratory  Symptoms. — There  is  usually  an  inflammation  of  the 
mucous  membrane  of  the  air  passages  of  a  catarrhal  nature.  We  have, 
first,  catarrh  of  the  nose,  marked  by  sneezing,  and  the  animal  will  rub 
or  wipe  his  nose  with  his. paws.  There  is  generally  an  increasing  discharge 
from  both  nostrils,  at  first  serous,  then  mucous,  and  later  on  purulent,  and 
generally  quite  an  odor  to  this  discharge.  There  is  a  sniffling  respiration. 
The  nose  sometimes  dry  and  cracked,  and  ulceration  covering  the  membranes 
of  the  nasal  fossa.  When  the  discharge  is  very  profuse  the  trouble  extends 
to  the  turbinated  bones  and  sinuses.  In  catarrh  of  the  larynx  we  have 
a  loud,  hoarse,  dry  cough,  which  causes  the  animal  a  great  deal  of  dis- 
comfort. Later  on  it  becomes  moist  and  looser,  and  there  is  usually  a 
discharge.  On  account  of  reflex  action  this  cough  sometimes  produces  vom- 
iting. There  is  not  much  difficulty  in  respiration  when  the  larynx  alone 
is  affected,  but  when  the  bronchial  tubes  become  involved  and  the  inflam- 
mation extends  downward  and  produces  bronchitis,  there  is  a  very  great 
increase  in  respiration,  and  a  very  painful,  distressing  cough. 

"Symptoms  of  the  Digestive  Tract. — In  catarrh  of  the  stomach,  which 
occurs  in  this  disease,  there  is  generally  complete  loss  of  appetite,  and  the 
animal  vomits  a  frothy  liquid.  There  is  a  fetid  diarrhea,  or  infrequent 
defecation  and  intense  thirst.  The  discharge  from  the  bowels  is  of  a 
liquid  consistency,  generally  muco-purulent,  and  may  be  streaked  with 
blood,  while  the  abdomen  will  be  found  to  be  very  painful  on  pressure. 

"Nervous  Symptoms. — The  animal's  senses  are  very  dull  and  he  seems 
much  depressed.  There  may  be  deep  coma,  or  periods  of  excitement  occur, 
nervousness  and  delirium;  these  periods  generally  short,  terminating  in 
depression.  There  may  be  twitching  of  the  muscles,  especially  of  the 
head  and  limbs.  At  times  there  is  twitching  of  the  muscles  of  the  lower 
jaw  that  causes  the  saliva  to  foam;  again  there  will  be  only  a  chatter- 
ing of  the  teeth.  The  animal  will  wander  without  aim,  or  run  around 
as  if  lost.  A  haggard  appearance  of  the  eyes,  the  head  thrown  backward, 
the  animal  perhaps  having  convulsions.  There  may  be  motor  paralysis, 
the  animal  unsteady  in  its  actions,  may  drag  his  legs  or  there  may  be 
loss  of  power  in  the  posterior  extremities,  the  animal  being  unable  to  stand. 
There  is  sometimes  loss  of  control  of  the  bladder  and  lower  bowel,  when 
the  urine  and  feces  are  involuntarily  evacuated.  When  an  animal  is  in 
a  poor  state  of  health,  being  aenemic  and  in  a  generally  run  down  condi- 
tion, he  is  generally  attacked  with  very  severe  nervous  symptoms.  Serious 
weakness  of  the  heart  may  occur.  Some  constitutions  seem  to  succumb 
easily,  while  others  seem  to  withstand  more  acute  attacks. 

"Complications. — Gome   of   the  complications  that   occur  in   distemper 


3.78  DISTEMPER 

are  capilliary  bronchitis,   pneumonia,   diarrhea,     jaundice,      paralysis,  and 
worst  of  all,  chorea. 

"Diagnosis. — When  the  animal  is  dull,  has  a  poor  appetite,  and  loses 
flesh  rapidly,  the  disease  should  be  suspected,  especially  if  there  has  been 
exposure  to  the  disease.  The  harsh  dry  cough  is  characteristic,  and  the 
eye  symptoms  when  accompanied  by  fever  are  diagnostic  of  this  disease. 
The  thermometer  should  be  used  in  these  cases. 

"Prognosis, — The  prognosis  of  distemper  we  regard  as  favorable  if 
the  case  is  seen  early  and  properly  treated.  The  danger  increases  with 
the  severity  of  the  symptoms  at  the  onset  of  the  disease.  A  persistent 
high  temperature,  or  a  subnormal  temperature  are  both  serious  symptoms. 
The  following  are  unfavorable  occurrences:  Much  emaciation  and  the 
animal  refuses  food,  or  when  there  are  grave  complications  such  as  pneu- 
monia, etc.,  or  when  the  animal  is  very  young  or  weak,  and  senemic,  or 
when  the  disease  attacks  different  organs  at  the  same  time.  Death  may 
occur  from  paralysis  of  the  brain  or  oedema  of  the  lungs,  from  septicaemia 
or  from  general  exhaustion.  Among  the  favorable  circumstances  are  the 
mature  age  of  the  patient,  good  constitution  of  the  animal,  mildness  of 
the  attack,  and  when  the  disease  is  confined  to  circumscribed  regions,  or 
to  one  organ  of  the  body. 

"Prophylaxis. — Due  attention  to  hygienics  is  one  of  the  most  impor- 
tant considerations.  It  is  a  good  plan  to  have  a  small  kennel  or  room 
where  there  will  be  plenty  of  fresh  air  without  draught  into  which  cases 
of  suspected  distemper  may  be  put  under  observation,  housing  all  distem- 
per cases  during  the  whole  course  of  the  illness  in  a  separate  kennel  or 
room.  Everything  that  has  been  about  the  animal  and  all  quarters  where 
the  animal  has  been  should  be  burned  if  possible.  If  it  is  not  desirable  to 
burn  the  quarters  there  should  be  a  thorough  disinfecting  of  them,  and 
especially  all  bedding  burned.  All  utensils  that  have  been  used  in  con- 
nection with  the  case,  such  as  feeding  and  drinking  pans,  should  be  thor- 
oughly disinfected.  A  dog  with  distemper  should  not  be  allowed  to  mingle 
with  others,  however  well  he  may  seem,  so  long  as  he  has  any  discharge 
from  eyes  or  nose,  and  never  before  from  four  to  eight  weeks  have  elapsed. 
Then,  after  the  nose  and  eyes  have  been  especially  disinfected  by  washing 
or  injecting  a  suitable  solution,  the  animal  should  be  washed  all  over,  the 
water  being  medicated  with  Clayton's  Ceoline  Dog  Wash,  Sanitas,  or  the 
Standard  Disinfectant.  As  an  animal  in  a  run-down,  debilitated  condi- 
tion will  contract  distemper  more  easily  than  one  in  perfect  health,  it  is 
essential  that  the  animal  be  kept  in  as  perfect  health  as  possible.  As  all 
dogs  are  subject  to  constipation,  especially  if  confined  in  the  house,  his 
bowels  should  be  seen  to  and  kept  open,  and  there  is  nothing  so  good  for 
this   purpose   as    Clayton's   Laxative   Pills. 

"Pathological  Anatomy. — Lesions  of  the  respiratory  tract  are  as  fol- 
lows: The  pituitary  membrane  or  lining  membrane  of  the  nasal  fossa  is 
injected,  infiltrated  and  covered  with  a  muco-purulent  exudate;  numerous 
eccymosecl  spots  are  found  on  the  membrane.  The  mucous  membrane  of 
the  larynx,  trachea  and  bronchi  shows  various  inflammatory  alterations. 
The  large  bronchi  are  filled  with  bloody  mucous,  the  smaller  filled  with 
a  thick,  tenacious  exudate.  The  pleura  is  covered  with  a  rose  or  citron 
colored  exudate.  The  bronchial  lymphatics  are  infiltrated,  tumefied,  and 
in  rare  cases  purulent.  The  surface  of  the  lungs  are  covered  with  red 
spots  and  the  lungs  are  collapsed  or  distended  with  air.  Lesions  of  the 
digestive  tract  are  as  follows:  The  mucous  membrane  of  the  small  intes- 
tines is  red,  and  numerous  eccymosed  spots  are  found,  also  hemorrhages 
in  the  subucous  tissue.  Occasionally  the  contents  of  the  intestines  are 
found   to  be  bloody. 

"In  the  brain  there  are  the  alterations  of  the  cerebral  oedema,  the 
nervous  substance  is  soft,  the  convoltions  are  flattened.  There  is  an  exu- 
date of  a  serious  character  in  the  lateral  ventricles  and  dilation  of  the 
blood  vessels  of  the  brain.  We  also  have  found  evidences  of  fatty  degenera- 
tion of  the  heart,  liver,  kidneys  and  an  abnormal  swelling  of  the  lymphatic 
gin  nds. 


DISTEMPER  179 

"Treatment. — The  treatment  of  distemper  is  principally  symptomatic. 
We  have,  however,  a  remedy  that  is  capable  of  destroying  the  contagious 
germ.  Our  researches  have  established  the  fact  that  Clayton's  Distem- 
perine  and  Distemperine  Tablets  enables  us  to  combat  the  disease  suc- 
cessfully. As  soon  as  symptoms  of  distemper  are  observed,  careful  at- 
tention to  all  hygienic  conditions  should  be  given  immediately.  There 
should  be  comfortable,  well-ventilated  quarters  furnished  for  the  animal, 
and  more  especially  there  should  be  plenty  of  fresh  air,  but  no  draught. 
These  quarters  should  be  thoroughly  disinfected  (See  Clayton's  Ceoline 
Dog  Wash),  with  changes  of  bedding  daily.  The  administration  of  Clay- 
ton's Distemperine  or  Clayton's  Distemperine  Tablets  should  be  commenced 
at  once  and  given  according  to  directions.  The  discharge  from  the  nose 
and  eyes  should  be  looked  after  and  removed  several  times  daily,  or  as 
often  as  it  collects.  The  eyes  should  be  bathed  with  warm  water  often, 
as  it  is  a  great  relief.  This  matter  is  too  often  neglected.  If  there  are 
occular  complications  Clayton's,  or  Eberhart's  'No.  2*  Eye  Lotion  should 
be  applied  to  prevent  those  serious  lesions  that  so  often  occur  in  this  dis- 
ease. If  there  are  skin  manifectations  Clayton's,  or  Eberhart's  Mange  or 
Skin  Cure  should  be  applied  carefully,  and  will  not  disturb  the  animal.- 
The  skin  eruption  sometimes  causes  the  animal  much  distress.  In  cases 
where  the  disease  is  localized  in  the  organs  of  digestion,  very  careful  at- 
tention should  be  given  to  the  ailment.  Careful  nursing  and  feeding  are 
of  the  utmost  importance.  The  dog's  strength  must  be  looked  after 
and  a  highly  nutritious,  easily  digested  diet  given.  Chopped  raw  beef  is 
often  taken  when  all  else  is  refused,  sheep's  head  broth  with  oatmeal  or 
rice  is  very  good..  If  the  animal  is  very  weak,  beef  tea,  raw  eggs  and  port 
wine  should  be  given  often  but  in  small  quantities.  If  food  is  refused 
enough  nourishment  must  be  forced  down  him  to  sustain  life.  Should  the 
stomach  refuse  to  retain  the  food  he  may  be  fed  per  enema.  Strong  purga- 
tives are  to  be  avoided  in  this  disease.  Exercise  is  injurious,  the  animal 
should  be  kept  quiet. 

"When  the  animal  is  convalescent  his  system  should  be  built  up,  and 
cod  liver  oil  is  valuable  in  these  cases,  while  Clayton's  Condition  Pills 
with  pepsin  give  remarkably  good  results." 

The  following  valuable  article  on  Distemper  was  published  in  Field 
and  Fancy  and  written  by  F.  J.  Skinner,  the  editor.  We  cannot  get  too 
much   knowledge   on  this   disease: 

"As  soon  as  the  disease  makes  its  appearance  the  affected  animal 
should  be  placed  in  specially  prepared  quarters,  which  are  dry  and  well 
ventilated,  but  free  from  drafts  and  not  liable  to  great  changes  in  tem- 
perature. Unless  the  weather  is  warm  abundant  bedding  of  wheat  straw 
should  be  supplied,  and  the  patient  made  as  comfortable  as  possible.  Dis- 
infectants should  be  in   constant   use. 

"The  bedding  should  be  changed  at  least  once  each  day,  and  oftener, 
if  the  patient  is  greatly  prostrated  and  unable  to  move  about.  It  is  also 
best  to  slightly  darken  the  quarters  so  that  the  patient  may  not  be  dis- 
turbed by  the  light  or  the  flies,  which  are  apt  to  congregate  about  him. 

"As  the  disease  progresses  it  is  probable  that  the  dog's  appetite  will 
fail,  and  while  at  first  he  may  eat  sparingly  of  finely  chopped  meat,  broth 
thickened  with  rice,,  or  toasted  bread  or  slightly  heated  milk,  the  time  may 
come  when  he  will  have  to  be  urged  or  compelled   to  partake  of  food. 

"When  the  stomach  is  decidedly  weak,  beef  tea,  raw  eggs  and  milk 
to  which  lime  water  has  been  added  must  be  depended  upon.  When  hand 
feeding  must  be  resorted  to  it  is  well  to  remember  that  the  continued 
forcing  of  food  upon  the  patient  will  disturb  and  excite  and  overcome  the 
good   effects   which   might   result   from   the   administration   of   food. 

"Raw  eggs  are  easily  fed,  as  it  is  only  necessary  to  break  off  the 
ends  of  the  shell,  open  the  dog's  mouth  with  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand, 
and  withdrawing  the  tongue  somewhat  with  one  or  two  fingers  of  the  right 
hand  allow  the  contents  of  the  egg  to  run  down  his  throat.  If  he  refuses 
to  swallow  relaxing  the  tongue  will   usually  have  the  desired   effect. 

"Where  great  debility  is  noted  it  is  well  to  accompany  the  eggs  with 


180  DISTEMPER 

a  tablespoonful  of  sherry  wine,  or  if  exhaustion  is  very  great  he  may  be 
stimulated  by  the  same  quantity  of  brandy.  Unless  the  dog  takes  food 
without  forcing,  two  eggs  morning  and  evening,  together  with  a  little 
lean  chopped  beef,  milk  or  broth  in  the  middle  of  the  day  should  be  suffi- 
cient. By  avoiding  continual  disturbance  of  the  sufferer  he  will  progress 
much  better  than  if  subjected  to  undue  attention. 

"His  temperature  must  not  be  allowed  to  get  too  high.  To  guard 
against  this  and  other  things  throughout  his  ordeal  until  the  appetite  re- 
turns, he  should  have  strict  attention  throughout.  It  is  well,  too,  to  have 
listerine  in  a  small  jam  pot  with  a  scrap  of  sponge  changed  twice  a  day, 
with  which  to  wash  the  mouth,  eyes  and  nose,  and  the  discharge  from  the 
latter  can  be  much  lessened,  relieved  and  finally  dried  up  by  the  admin- 
istration of  powdered  camphor  in  the  form  of  snuff. 

"Also  the  bowels  must  be  watched,  opening  medicine  given  if  at  all 
costive,  and  on  recovery  the  patient  must  not  be  allowed  to  go  out  too  soon 
or  exert  himself  violently  unless  you  want  a  relapse.  Very  great  benefit 
will  be  derived  from  burning  a  cresoline  lamp,  placed  fairly  near  to  the 
patient  during  the  whole  illness.  It  acts  as  a  disinfectant,  is  good  for  the 
respiratory  organs,  and  generally  tends  to  the  curtailment,  occasionally  even 
the  prevention  of  the  malady. 

"The  fact  is  that  every  case  of  distemper  needs  to  be  treated  on  its 
own  merits,  according  to  the  symptoms  which  it  presents.  When  any  com- 
bination of  symptoms  such  as  sickness,  diarrhoea,  or  cough,  or  fits  present 
itself,  it  must  be  dealt  with  in  the  order  of  severity — that  is  to  say,  the 
most  distressing  symptoms  must  be  taken  first,  and. have  particular  atten- 
tion paid  to  it,  while  the  less  serious  symptoms  can  be  dealt  with  as  oppor- 
tunity offers. 

"There  are,  however,  certain  points  connected  with  the  treatment  of 
distemper  which  apply  to  all  cases  alike.  One  of  the  most  important  of 
these  points  has  reference  to  diet.  When,  by  the  aid  of  a  veterinary  clinical 
thermometer,  it  has  been  ascertained  that  a  dog  supposed  to  be  suffering 
from  distemper  is  in  a  feverish  condition,  it  becomes  important  that  no 
solid  food  whatever  should  be  given  until  the  fevered  condition  has  been 
reduced.     A  dog  must  be  kept  on  liquid  food,  such  as  gravy  and  milk. 

"Another  point  of  importance  in  all  cases  of  distemper  is  with  regard 
to  exercise.  The  greatest  care  chould  be  taken  not  to  allow  a  dog  to  con- 
tract a  chill,  and  it  should  only  be  exercised  if  the  weather  be  perfectly 
fine  and  dry,  and  not  even  then  if  there  is  much  feverishness.  Where 
valuable  dogs  are  concerned,  the  owners  must  attend  to  all  these  matters, 
and  treat  patients  with  as  much  care  as  a  human  patient  requires,  because 
the  more  highly  bred  a  dog  is,  as  a  rule,  the  more  delicate  he  will  be,  and 
a  greater  difficulty  there  will  be  to  get  him  safely  through  a  severe  attack 
of  distemper. 

"Many  dogs  when  suffering  from  distemper  have  a  disposition  more 
or  less  pronounced  to  roughness  of  the  skin,  and  in  many  cases  absolutely 
to  eczema.  The  eczematous  eruption  which  so  often  appears  during  dis- 
temper is  liable  to  be  mistaken  for  mange,  because  it  usually  appears  as  an 
eruption  of  small  pustules  filled  with  a  watery  fluid,  which  discharges  and 
makes  the  animal's  coat  very  unpleasant.  It  may  also  be  said  at  the  out- 
set that  the  appearance  of  an  eruption  during  distemper  should  always  be 
regarded  with  satisfaction,  inasmuch  as  that  is,  practically  speaking,  na- 
ture's way  of  throwing  off  the  ill  humors  with  which  the  body  is  charged. 
The  efforts  of  the  owner  of  a  dog  which  is  suffering  in  this  way  should  be 
directed  rather  to  modifying  the  severity  of  the  skin  trouble,  and  of  giving 
the  dog  comfort  while  that  lasts,  than  checking  it.  It  is  a  dangerous  thing 
to  try  to  drive  back,  as  it  were,  an  outbreaking  complaint  into  the  sys- 
tem. It  is  far  better  to  let  it  run  its  course,  subject  to  a  local  alleviative 
treatment. 

"During  the  time  that  a  dog  is  suffering  from  distemper,  it  is  well 
to  watch  carefully  for  any  symptoms  of  paralysis,  which  would  be  indicated 
by  twitching  of  the  muscles  and  sometimes  by  a  fit.  There  are  a  great  many 
Of  these  cases  nowadays — more  than  there  used  to  be  by  far.     Skin  disease 


DISTEMPER  1H 

ii  should  be  regarded  as  kind  of  a  safety  valve,  for  dogs  that  suffer  from  skin 
complaint  rarely,  if  ever,  develop  paralysis  or  chorea. 

The  following  valuable  article  was  taken  from  Field  and  Fancy: 

After  -Effects  of  Distemper — Distemper  in  itself  is  not  so  serious  a 
matter  as  are  the  troubles  which  follow  in  its  wake.  The  most  deadly  of 
these  is  the  complaint  known  as  chorea,  or  paralysis,  sometimes  called 
"twitch,"  which  is  an  involuntary  jerking  of  the  nerves,  affecting  sometimes 
the  head,  sometimes  the  legs,  sometimes  the  whole  body.  It  usually  comes 
about  in  this  way:  A  dog  has  distemper,  and,  as  the  owner  believes,  has 
it  very  mildly;  he  merely  shows  signs  of  a  little  cold,  or  perhaps  he  is  merely 
"off  color,"  as  the  expression  is,  loses  his  appetite  and  seems  not  to  be 
himself  for  a  few  days,  no  other  symptoms  in  particular  making  their  ap- 
pearance. 

After  a  few  days  he  is  better,  and  the  owner  thinks  he  has  had  dis- 
temper and  is  getting  over  it,  and  nothing  more  is  thought  of  the  matter 
until  a  little  later  on — probably  after  the  lapse  of  week  or  two — he  has  a 
fit,  and  on  recovering  from  the  fit  it  is  found  that  he  is  twitching  all  over. 
This  is  not  always  what  happens.  In  many  cases  the  first  symptoms  of  any- 
thig  wrong  takes  the  form  of  this  involuntary  twitching  of  the  muscles; 
bpt  the  disease  is  very  insidious  and  comes  on  in  various  ways,  although  it 
seems  to  be  almost  entirely  connected  with  distemper,  and  the  moral  to 
be  learned  from  this,  therefore,  is  that  any  case  of  distemper,  however  mild, 
should  be  treated  as  seriously  as  if  it  were  a  bad  attach,  because  this  chorea 
or  paralysis  ought  almost  to  be  described  as  a  sort  of  suppressed  distemper, 
which,  if  the  case  is  thoroughly  treated,  is  brought  out  of  the  system  instead 
of  being  allowed  to  lie  dormant  there  until  it  affects  the  brain  and  causes 
the  distressing  symptoms  of  twitching,  which  in  many  cases  last  till  the 
end  of  the  dog's  life. 

With  regard  to  carelessness  in  dealing  with  dogs  which  are  convales- 
cent. The  most  dangerous  cases  of  distemper,  apart  from  those  in  which 
there  has  been  chorea  or  paralysis,  are  the  cases  in  which  the  liver  is  very 
seriously  affected.  Jaundice,  as  every  one  knowrs  who  has  had  experience 
with  it,  is  a  very  bad  complaint,  and  it  carries  off  a  good  many  dogs.  It 
very  often  occurs  in  combination  with  distemper,  and  when  a  dog  which  has 
been  suffering  in  that  way  with  a  combination  of  distemper  and  liver  com- 
plaint has  taken  a  turn  for  the  better  great  care  will  be  needed  for  some 
time. 


182  i  HYDROPHOBIA 


HYDROPHOBIA 


The  followng  article,  (with  some  additions),  is  the  one  in  my  last  book, 
and  it  cannot  well  be  improved  on,  but  have  added  some  strong  words 
against  Hydrophobia,  the  side- 1  fight  on,  as,  since  this  was  written,  fifteen 
years  ago,  my  non-believe  in  hydrophobia  has  been  made  stronger,  as  during 
this  period  I  have  been  bitten  several  times,  and  quite  badly  chewed  up  by 
dogs  that — by  all  the  symptoms  that  are  supposed  to  exist,  and  yet  I  am 
here,   writing  another  book,   and   none  the  worse   for   the   bites. 

'  "Germs"  are  now  very  fashionable  with  doctors,  (before  we  had 
so  many  "germs"  there  were  not  nearly  so  many  sick  and  dying  people  as 
there  are  now),  but  now  most  all  verterinarians,  and  some  doctors,  get  out 
of  hydrophobia  the  easiest  way  they  can,  by  calling  it  a  "germ."  I  would 
like  to  see  one  of  these  "germs." 

Appendicitis,  now  so  fashionable  also,  in  humans,  and  an  operation 
almost  invariably  necessary,  (the  patient  often  dying,  but  "operation  very 
successful"),  and  it's  a  wonder  the  poor  dog  has  as  yet  not  gotten  this  trou- 
ble. 

To  speak  out  plain  and  honest,  I  do  not  believe  in  hydrophobia  at  all, 
for  I  don't  believe  what  I  don't  see,  and  a  good  deal  that  I  do  see.  Many 
others,  and  among  them  noted  authorities,  however,  do  believe  in  the  exis- 
tence of  such  a  disease,  and  in  writing  on  this  subject  I  shall  give  you  my 
own  ideas  and  belief,  and  also  those  of  others  more  noted  than  myself — 
so  you  can  read  it  all  and  believe  as  you  like. 

I  have  spent  a  lot  of  time  since  my  first  book  in  collecting  additional 
information  and  statistics  on  this  subject,  as  it  is  an  important  one  to  know 
all  about  that  you  can,  and  I  consider  that  in  this  article  all  has  been 
said  that  can  be  said.  The  authorities  I  quote,  pro.  and  con.,  are  eminent, 
and  the  case  is  now  presented  to  you,  the  jury,  to  decide: 

It  might  be  considered  presumptious  and  egotistical  in  me  to  say  that 
there  is  no  such  disease,  but  I  can  honestly  say  that  I  have  never  seen  a 
case,  and  don't  believe  in  it,  and  I  have  as  good  a  right  today  to  have  "gone 
mad"  as  any  one  who  was  ever  bitten  by  a  dog,  for  I  carry  scars  on  my 
body  that  have  been  there  for  many  years — from  bites  of  dogs — and  I 
have  been  bitten  hundreds  of  times  in  the  past  thirty  years.  While  I  am 
writing  this  article  I  have  five  sores  on  my  right  wrist  received  yesterday 
from  a  boarder,  a  mastiff,  but  I  fully  expect  to  be  able  to  finish  this  book 
and  live  for  many  years  yet,  long  enough  at  least  to  see  it  in  the  hands  of 
every  dog  owner  in  this  country;  in  fact,  I  never  had  time  to  "go  mad." 

In  handling  dogs  of  all  breeds,  strange  dogs,  curs  and  thoroughbreds, 
incidental  to  having  been  a  "dog  crank"  for  thirty-five  years,  it  necessarily 
follows  that  I  have  had  a  vast  and  varied  experience,  and  .could  not  have 
done  all  this  and  not  get  bitten.  The  bite  from  a  dog  does  not  trouble 
me  any  more  than  if  I  cut  my  finger,  which  might  be  inconvenient  and 
bothersome  for  a  few  days.  The  only  thing  I  have  ever  done  when  bitten, 
if  the  bite  was  on  a  part  of  the  body  where  I  could  get  my  lips  to  it, 
was  to  at  once  suck  the  blood  from  the  place  bitten  and  spit  it  out.  This 
ends  the  matter  there  and  then  with  me.  There  might  have  been  danger 
of  blood  poisoning,  as  there  always  is  from  a  wound,  but  if  so,  how  simple 
to  suck  out  this  poison  and  at  once  get  rid  of  all  danger  by  spitting  out 
the  poison  you  have  abstracted  from  the  wound.  It  must  be  done  imme- 
diately, however.     Is  there  anything  more  simple  than  this? 

In  case  you  are  bitten  on  any  portion  of  the  body  that  you  could  not 
get  at  to  suck  the  wound,  or  some  one  was  not  near  to  do  this  for  you, 


Hydrophobia  m 

then  apply  Peroxyde  of  Hydrogen  to  the  bite.  Allow  it  to  remain  on  for 
a  minute  or  so,  then  remove  the  foamy  matter  produced  thereby  by  squeez- 
ing onto  it  some  water  from  a  sponge  or  cloth.  Then  keep  the  wound 
clean  by  applying  the  Peroxyde  three  or  four  times  a  day  and  using  often 
the   antiseptic   solution   given   under   heading   of   "Bites." 

(Since  writing  this  article,  tincture  of  iron  is  the  latest  treatment, 
now  used  by  doctors  for  bites,  instead  of  cauterizing  the  wounds,  and  then, 
the  "Unguentine  Salve"  for  healing). 

Now,  should  you  be  bitten  by  a  dog,  if  you  are  a  sensible  person,  not 
nervous  or  easily  scared,  have  not  read  too  many  highly  colored  and  sensa- 
tional "mad  dog"  items  in  the  newspapers  (which  kill  more  people  than 
dogs  do),  and  keep  your  sober  senses  about  you,  don't  believe  or  pay  any 
attention  to  what  your  supposed  friends  say,  when  they  tell  you  "how 
sorry  they  are,"  and  bestow  on  you  a  look  of  pity,  but  go  about  your  busi- 
ness as  usual;  forget  the  affair,  and  you  will  never  go  mad.  If  you  believe 
all  you  read  and  hear  as  to  going  mad,  lose  your  nerve  and  senses  and  get 
scared,  it's  the  easiest  thing  in  the  world  to  "go  mad"  and  die. 

If  this  is  not  logic,  why  have  I  not  gone  mad  years  ago?  I  was  bitten 
a  couple  of  years  ago  by  a  Yorkshire  terrier  brought  to  me  that  was  suf- 
fering from  what  a  very  good  veterinary  surgeon  in  Cincinnati  had  diagnos- 
ed as  dumb  rabies  in  this  dog.  I  could  not  take  the  dog  to  treat,  as  I 
was  just  starting  .on  a  trip,  so  sent  the  animal  to  a  veterinary  surgen,  who 
took  him  to  treat.  This  dog,  after  biting  me,  also  bit  him,  and  the  dog 
died  in  twenty-four  hours.  The  doctor  held  a  post-mortem  examination  and 
told  me  it  was  a  case  of  dumb  rabies;  but  the  doctor  and  I  are  both  living. 

Find  me  a  doctor  who  can  cure  hydrophobia,  and  then  I  will  be  glad 
to  have  him  explain  to  me  what  the  disease  is.  If  he  can  do  this,  then  I'll 
try  to  believe  there  is  such  a  thing  as  hydrophobia.  If  he  can't  cure  it,  he 
doesn't  know  what  it  is,  for  there  is  in  this  enlightened  age  a  cure  for  every 
disease;  but  you  must  first  know  what  ycu  are  trying  to  cure,  or  you  won't 
cure  it. 

Every  summer  the  papers  are  full  of  mad  dog  victims;  but  our  best 
authorities  who  do  believe  in  hydrophobia  will  tell  you  that  summer,  or 
in  hot  weather,  is  not  the  season  of  the  year  that  dogs  go  mad.  You  read 
of  the  person  dying  in  great  agony;  that  he  bites  and  barks,  etc.,  etc.  So 
he  apparently  does,  I  will  admit,  as  I  know  of  some  authenticated  cases  like 
this,  but  the  "barking  and  biting"  could  easily  be  explained  if  the  atten- 
dants and  friends  who  saw  it  were  not  all  themselves  scared  and  off  their 
base  and  had  let  imagination  make  them  so — all  due  to  the  scare  that  comes 
to  so  many  from  the  awful  word  "hydrophobia"  and  the  many  vivid  and 
overdrawn  accounts  they  have  read  in  the  papers  gotten  up  by  a  very  bright 
reporter  who  had  to  furnish  something  sensational  for  his  paper.  It's  just 
like  the  cry  of  "fire"  to  so  many  people,  who  often  lose  their  lives  by  not 
retaining  their  senses  about  them  and  in  most  cases  of  this  kind  taking 
their  time  and  getting  safely  out  of  the  burning  building,  instead  of  either 
jumping  out  of  a  high  window  to  be  dashed  to  pieces  on  the  pavement  below 
or  getting  .crushed  to  death  in  the  mad  rush  of  the  others. 

In  case  you  are  bitten  by  a  dog,  see  to  it  that  the  dog  is  not  killed, 
but  that  he  is  confined  and  well  taken  care  of  for  a  few  weeks,  at  least 
until  you  can  see  and  know  for  yourself  that  he  was  not  mad,  and  then 
you  can  drop  the  matter.  What  an  insane  idea  it  is  to  kill  the  dog  after  he 
has  bitten  you,  for  then  you  will  never  know  whether  he  was  mad  or  not, 
and  the  constant  dread  and  fear  will  always  be  with  you,  and  probably — 
if  you  are  of  a  nervous  disposition — may  yet  cause  you  to  "go  mad"  and 
die.  I  have  often  been  called  in  to  put  a  poor  dog  out  of  the  way  that  was 
supposed  to  be  mad  (and  I  chloroformed  it  according  to  orders  from  its 
owner),  thinking  to  myself  at  the  time  that  it  was  better  for  the  dog  than 
to  live  and  be  cared  for  by  an  idiot  who  did  not  know  near  as  much  as 
the  poor  dog,  who  was  in  serious  trouble,  of  course,  but  due  to  some  natural 
cause  and  not  to  so-called  hydrophobia.  Sometimes,  however,  out  of  pity 
for  the  dog,  when  I  saw  he  had  a  chance  to  live  if  properly  treated,  I  have 
asked  to  be  allowed  to  take  the  dog  to  my  kennels,  and  I  went  to  work 


184  HYDROPHOBIA 

and  saved  the  pooi*  fellow.  I  am  deeply  in  earnest  in  my  views  oil  this" 
much-mooted  suhject,  and  I  believe  that  thousands  of  people  would  be  alive 
today  that  have  died  from  hydrophobia  if  they  would  look  at  the  matter 
os  I  do  and  act  accordingly.  Many  poor  dogs  have  fits  hi  summer,  due  to 
many  causes,  but  they  could  nearly  all  have  been  cured  ii  properly  treated 
in  time,  and  as  all  important  diseases  are  treated  in  this  book,  if  you  will 
follow  its  teachings  your  dog  will  live  until  the  time  comes  for  him  to  pass 
in  his  checks  and  go  to  "dog  heaven"  with  the  rest  of  the  good  canines 
gone  before. 

A  hard  question  for  you  or  any  doctor  to  answer  is,  "Why  have  I 
not  gone  mad"  when  it  is  a  fact  not  to  be  denied  that  I  have  been  bitten 
bitten  by  so-called  mad  dogs?  I  am  willing  to  be  convinced  that  I  am  wrong, 
if  it  can  be  done.  While  I  may  be  taking  up  too  much  space  on  this  subject, 
yet  it  is  an  important  one.  I  will  next  give  two  interviews  that  were  pub- 
lished in  March,  1896,  in  a  St.  Louis  paper  that  may  interest  and  benefit 
some: 

"Prof.  Al.  G.  Eberhart,  who  came  to  St.  Louis  last  v/eek  to  assume 
active  charge  of  the  preparations  for  the  bench  show,  is  a  man  who  has  spent 
the  better  part  of  his  life  raising  and  caring  for  dogs,  and  his  opinion  upon 
this  subject  is  that  of  an  authority.      Prof.  Eberhart  says: 

"  '1  nave  been  bitten  by  dogs  over  a  hundred  times  in  my  life  and  carry 
scars  now  that  I've  had  for  twenty-five  years.  Some  of  these  so-called  mad 
dogs  have  bitten  me,  but  yet  I  am  not  mad.  I  have  been  bitten  by  dogs 
that  veterinary  surgeons  and  regular  physicians  have  pronounced  and  diag- 
nosed as  having  rabies,  but  I  didn't  go  mad  because  I've  yet  to  see  a  genuine 
mad  dog.  Had  I  been  nervous  and  easily  scared  I  would  very  likely  have 
been  buried  long  ago.  Some  ten  years  ago  a  young  lady  in  New  York  City 
was  bitten  by  her  pet  dog,  and,  not  wanting  to  have  it  killed,  it  was  sent 
to  Harry  Jennings,  the  dog  fancier.  The  dog  bit  him  several  times.  The 
young  lady  died  in  three  weeks  from  alleged  hydrophobia,  and  Harry 
Jennings  is  alive  yet.  The  young  lady  died  from  fright.  This  I  know  to 
be  a  fact.  Find  me  a  doctor  that  can  tell  what  hydrophobia  is,  then  I'll 
try  to  believe  there  is  such  a  disease.  If  the  doctor  can't  tell  you  what 
the  disease  is,  he  surely  can't  cure  it.  When  a  dog  bites  you,  if  it  is  on 
any  part  of  your  body  where  you  can  get  your  mouth  to  it  as  soon  as  bitten, 
suck  the  wound,  thus  quickly  abstracting  the  poison  if  any  there,  spit  it  out 
and  forget  that  you  were  bitten  by  a  dog,  for  depend  on  it  this  ends  the 
matter  there  and  then.  You  have  gotten  rid  of  the  poison  before  it  was 
distributed  through  the  system.  If  on  any  part  of  the  body  you  can't  get 
at,  get  a  friend  to  do  it  for  you.  Another  method  that  is  good  is  to  at  once 
wash  the  wound  with  water.  Then  apply  the  actual  cautery,  a  piece  of  iron 
heated  to  white  heat,  not  to  the  flesh,  but  hold  it  about  half  an  inch  from 
it.  The  intense  heat  causes  but  little  pain  and  will  destroy  the  bacilli  of 
rabies  to  the  depth  of  one-quarter  of  an  inch.  If  carbolic  or  nitric  acid  or 
nitrate  of  silver  is  used,  not  five  minutes  should  elapse,  as  unless  properly 
performed  inside  of  ten  minutes  it  is  not  only  useless  but  positively  injur- 
ious as  the  poison  of  rabies  will  have  been  distributed  throughout  the  sys- 
tem in  this  time.'  " 

The  following  appeared  editorially  in  the  St.  Louis  Republic  of  Febru- 
ary 24,  1896:  "The  interview  with  Prof.  Al.  G.  Eberhart,  Superintendent  of 
the  St.  Louis  bench  show,  which  was  printed  in  the  Sunday  Post-Dispatch, 
in  which  Prof.  Eberhart  made  the  assertion  that  he  had  never  seen  a 
genuine  case  of  hydrophobia,  and  that  he  believed  that  cases  that  resulted 
in  what  was  diagnosed  as  rabies  from  the  effects  of  dog  bites  were  the 
result  of  imagination,  has  created  much  talk  and  considerable  comment. 

"Prof.  Eberhart  was  called  upon  Saturday  by  a  Post-Dispatch  re- 
porter, and  asked  if  he  could  make  his  position  as  a  disbeliever  in  the  ex- 
istence of  the  disease  plainer  than  those  reasons  given  in  the  short  letter 
in  last   Sunday's   Post-Dispatch. 

"  'Yes,'  said  the  Professor,  'I  believe  that  I  can.  When  I  said  that 
I  had  never  seen  a  genuine  case  of  hydrophobia  I  meant  it.  I  have  seen 
many  dogs  that  were  thought  to  be  mad,  but  have  never  yet  seen  one  that 


HYDROi'llOlSiA  185 

1  Was  thoroughly  Satisfied  was  afflicted  with  rabies.  If  people  would  save 
the  lives  of  dogs  suspected  of  being  thus  affected,  we  might  in  time  have 
an  understanding  of  the  subject  by  studying  the  sick  dogs.  But  the  first 
thing  that  happens  to  a  dog  when  he  shows  signs  of  anything  wrong  is  to 
immediately  suspect  it  of  being  mad,  and  after  that  it  is  a  very  short  time 
until  its  existence  is  ended  by  a  bullet  through  the  head,  and  the  most  val- 
uable evidence  in  the  case  is  destroyed.  If  the  dog  had  been  spared  and 
confined,  if  he  had  been  mad,  the  fact  could  have  been  easily  determined, 
and  he  could  be  destroyed  after  the  evidence  was  complete  that  it  was  a 
case  of  rabies  without  a  shadow  of  doubt.  But  this  course  is  seldom  pursued, 
and  the  dog  that  has  bitten  any  one  in  a  spasm.it  makes  no  matter  what 
was  the  foundation  for  his  pain,  is  immediately  killed  without  regard  to  his 
value,  and  the  bitten  party  left  to  suffer  the  torments  of  uncertainty  as  to 
whether  he  or  she  was  inoculated  with  the  virus  of  hydrophobia  or  not. 

"  'Now  here  is  a  case  in  point,'  continued  the  professor.  'Last  week, 
just  before  I  came  to  St.  Louis,  a  gentleman  called  on  me  one  evening  at 
my  home  in  Cincinnati  and  said  that  he  had  just  taken  his  pet  dog  to  the 
police  station  near  my  house  to  be  shot;  that  he  thought  that  the  dog  had 
gone  mad,  and  to  be  on  the  safe  side  he  had  decided  to  have  him  destroyed, 
and  had  brought  him  to  the  station  house  for  that  purpose.  It  was  with 
much  reluctance  that  he  did  this,  however,  as  the  dog  was  a  household  pet, 
and  its  death  would  be  keenly  felt  and  its  presence  missed.  The  policeman 
who  was  on  duty  at  the  time  suggested  that,  as  I  lived  near  the  station  he 
could  call  me  over  to  look  at  the  dog.  I  assured  the  gentleman  that  I 
would  go  over  to  the  station  in  a  few  minutes,  and  if  I  could  do  anything 
for  the  animal  I  would  use  the  extent  of  my  abilities,  and  he  returned  home. 
"  'After  I  had  finished  my  dinner  I  went  over  to  the  police  station  and 
found  that  the  Sergeant  had  arrived.  I  asked  him  if  he  had  the  dog. 
"  'Yes,  said  he;  'he's  in  that  cage  there." 
"  'Bring  him  out,'  said   I. 

"  'Not  on  your  life,'  replied  the  Sergeant.  'I  wouldn't  touch  that  dog 
for  all  the  money  in  Hamilton  County.  Why,  man,  he's  mad;  I  won't  go 
near  him.  If  you  want  to  be  foolish  enough  to  try  and  do  anything  with 
him,  go  and  unlock  the  cell  yourself;  I  think  he  ought  to  be  shot  without 
delay.' 

"  'Well,  I  went  over  to  the  cell  and  saw  the  dog.  He  was  a  little 
Italian  greyhound,  as  fragile-looking  as  a  long-stemmed  wine  glass.  The 
poor  little  fellow  was  in  the  throes  of  a  hard  spasm  as  I  looked  at  him. 
He  had  his  delicate,  slender,  head  thrust  between  the  bars  in  his  pain,  and 
his  hind-quarters  were  jammed  in  between  the  two  adjoining  uprights.  He 
looked  up  at  me  with  fear  showing  out  of  his  sick,  brown  eyes,  but  be- 
trayed no  signs  of  dog  madness.  He  was  so  weak  and  trembling  that  he 
could  scarcely  stand. 

"  'I  unlocked  the  cell  door  and  went  in  and  picked  the  little  fellow 
up,  and  after  soothing  him  and  getting  him  quieted  down  a  little,  I  admin- 
istered a  dose  of  a  fractional  part  of  a  grain  of  morphine  to  ease  his  im- 
mediate pain,  and  carried  him  away.  A  little  later  I  gave  him  a  small  dose 
of  castor  oil  and  put  him  to  bed.  I  sat  up  with  that  dog  until  3  o'clock 
in  the  morning,  and  after  he  was  relieved  by  the  oil  he  was  well,  and, 
barring  the  weakness  resulting  from  his  terrific  spasms  of  the  night  before, 
he  was  perfectly  sound.'  " 

(I  forgot  to  state  in  this  interview  that  before  leaving  the  dog,  and 
after  the  oil,  I  gave  him  a  dose  of  worm  medicine;  result  was  a  lot  of 
worms  passed,  and  here  was  the  cause  of  this  "mad  dog.") 

"  'After  I  had  arisen  in  the  morning  I  telephoned  the  owner  of  the 
dog  to  come  and  get  his  pet,  He  came,  and  his  gratitude  was  manifest 
in  the  way  he  greeted  the  little  fellow  that  he  had  condemned  to  death  the 
night  before, 

"  'Now,  supposing  that  the  dog  had  bitten  the  Police  Sergeant.  The 
Sergeant  was  firmly  convinced  that  the  dog  was  afflicted  with  the  rabies, 
and  if,  by  any  possibility  the  dog  had  bitten  him  he  would  have  worried 
himself  until  it  would  have  perhaps  resulted  in  an  attack  of  hydrophobia, 


186  Hydrophobia 

The  clog  would  have  been  immediately  killed,  and  thus  all  evidence  that 
there  was  no  rabies  manifested  in  the  animal  would  have  been  destroyed, 
and  another  name  would  have  been  added  to  the  list  of  supposed  victims  to 
this  terrible  disease,  delusion,  or  whatever  you  choose  to  term  it. 

"  'But  what  was  really  the  matter  with  the  dog,  Professor?'  queried 
the  Post-Dispatch  man. 

"  'Worms,'  said  Prof.  Eberhart,  'nothing  but  worms.  And  let  me  tell 
you  that  at  the  bottom  of  nearly  every  illness  to  which  a  dog  is  subjected 
you  will  find  worms  to  be  the  cause.  In  fact,  they  cause  eight-tenths  of  all 
the  deaths  in  the  canine  world.  If  owners  would  keep  their  dogs'  bowels 
open  with  an  occasional  dose  of  some  purgative  there  would  be  many  less 
cases  of  "mad  dogs"  like  that  poor  little,  shivering,  sick  Italian  greyhound 
lying   on   the   sold   stone  floor   of  that   Cincinnati   station   cell. 

"  'But  that  wasn't  the  end  of  that  case,'  continued  the  Professor,  'and 
this  part  of  it  shows  just  how  little  this  question  of  mad  dogs  is  undersood. 
After  I  had  gone  down  town  to  my  office  the  same  morning  the  dog  had 
been  taken  home,  his  owner,  who  had  called  for  him  in  the  morning, 
came  in. 

"  'Now,  Professor,'  said  he,  'I  know  and  you  know  that  our  dog  is 
all  right,  but  my  wife  has  been  worrying  all  night  about  him,  and  she 
was  so  frightened  yesterday  over  his  wild  running  and  jumping  that  noth- 
ing but  a  personal  visit  from  you  will  reassure  her  and  quiet  her  fears, 
and  I  wish  you  would  call  at  my  house  and  see  her. 

"  'I  went  out  to  the  gentleman's  residence  and  talked  to  his  wife.  I 
told  her  how  her  dog  would  act  under  certain  conditions.  I  asked  her,  if 
her  infant  was  thrown  into  spasms  from  worms  if  she  would  be  afraid  of 
contracting  hydrophobia  from  it.  I  showed  her  that  an  ailment  affected 
a  dog  exactly  as  it  would  a  human.  She  was  a  sensible  woman  and  saw 
the  point  at  once,  and  I  am  sure  there  will  be  no  more  "rabies"  in  her  dogs. 

"  'Now,  I  know  of  another  case,'  said  the  professor,  'where  a  small 
child  was  bitten  and  a  fearful  gash  cut  by  the  dog's  teeth  clean  to  the 
skull,  and  that  dog  died  two  days  later  with  all  the  aversion  to  water  that 
they  claim  is  an  infallible  symptom  of  hydrophobia,  that  he  could  manifest 
still  the  little  boy  did  not  have  rabies,  and  simply  because  he  was  too  small 
to  take  part  in  his  parents'  worry  over  the  outcome  of  the  bite.'  " 

The  following  appeared  editorially  in  the  St.  Louis  Republic,  Feb.  24, 
1896: 

"Is  the  Mad  Dog  a  Myth? 

"This  is  far  from  dog-day  time,  but  The  Republic  trusts  that  the  optim- 
ism of  the  St.  Louis  Bench  Show's  Superintendent  will  be  treasured  by  ner- 
vous mothers  for  use  next  August.  He  says  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as 
poisonous  rabies  in  dogs. 

"It  is  curious  that  every  man  who  has  handled  great  numbers  of  dogs 
bears  the  same  testimony. 

"There  is  danger  of  blood  poisoning  as  a  result  of  any  animal's  bite; 
and  there  is  lock-jaw  as  the  extreme  effect  of  blood  poisoning.  But  the  men 
who  have  been  longest  in  charge  of  dogs  agree  that  there  is  no  rabid  con- 
dition when  a  bite  is  more  dangerous  than  at  any  other  time;  and  that  a 
dog's  bite  at  any  time  is  no  more  dangerous  than  the  scratch  of  a  cat. 

"It  does  seem  that  they  ought  to  know.  For  the  sake  of  humanity's 
peace  of  mind  the  doctors  should  find  out  whether  the  experience  of  men 
who  have  been  bitten  dozens  of  times  is  worth  anything." 

Harry  W.  Lacy  recently  wrote  in  the  American  Stockkeeper  on  this 
subject:  "One  would  think  that  a  man  having  intelligence  enough  to  write 
editorials  on  a  leading  daily  paper  would  inform  himself  sufficiently  on  the 
subject  not  to  make  such  a  foolish  statement  as  that  muzzling  dogs  was  a 
sure  way  to  produce  hydrophobia,  but  this  is  what  a  Boston  Standard 
editorial  said  last  week.  Probably  there  is  no  subject  about  which  the 
average  newspaper  writer  gets  off  more  tommy  rot  than  hydrophobia  and 
mad  dog  scares. 


Hydrophobia  s  is? 

"These  hydrophobia  scares  are  mainly  due  to  the  sensational  imagina- 
tion of  the  reporter  who  plays  upon  the  nervousness  of  a  public  only  too 
ready  to  shy  a  stone  at  dog,  and  then  when  the  scare  has  assumed  suitable 
proportions  and  a  muzzling  order  goes  forth,  these  writers  are  again  the 
first  to  question  its  advisability  and  play  on  tbe  feeling  of  their  readers 
who  may  own  dogs,  with  the  nonsensical  statement  alluded  to  above. 

"The  very  rare  disease  called  hydrophobia  can  only  be  produced 
through- inoculation  with  the  rabial  virus,  and  a  dog  might  mear  a  muzzle 
to  the  end  of  his  natural  life,  and  unless  he  was  actually  bitten  by  a  rabid 
dog  he  would  be  none  the  worse,  though,  according  to  his  temperament, 
the  incubus  might  make  him  bad  tempered,  irritable,  and  so  excite  his  ner- 
vous temperament  as  to  send  him  into  a  fit  wherein  he  would  probably  dis- 
play some  of  those  symptoms  of  rabies  popularly,  but  erroneously,  asso- 
ciated with  hydrophobia. 

"If  such  a  thing  as  hydrophobia  really  exists  in  a  locality  there  is  no 
surer  method  to  stamp  it  out  than  a  general  muzzling  order  strictly  en- 
forced. The  reason  is  obvious.  This  may  entail  hardship  on  individual 
dogs,  but  the  good  of  the  others  and  the  community  at  large  demands  it. 

"Speaking  of  hydrophobia  scares  we  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  the 
Pasteur  Institute  in  New  York  has  done  more  to  keep  alive  an  unhealthy 
state  of  public  mind  in  regard  to  the  disease  than  any  other  agency.  The 
advent  of  new  patients  is  heralded  throughout  the  country,  and  patients 
from  distant  states  are  treated  on  the  supposition  that  they  have  been  bit- 
ten by  mad  dogs,  but  rarely  is  it  proved  that  the  dogs  were  really  rabid. 
Still  they  undergo  the  treatment,  and  Dr.  Gibier  claims  credit  for  subse- 
quent immunity." 

Here  are  the  ideas  of  Dr.  H.  Clay  Glover,  of  New  York  City,  one  of  the 
highest  authorities  on  canine  diseases  that  we  have  in  America: 

Dr.  H.  Clay  Glover,  interviewed  on  the  muzzling  question  by  a  New 
York  Herald  man,  was  asked  why  the  muzzle  was  unnecessary.  "Because," 
said  Dr.  Glover,  "it  is  of  no  possible  benefit  either  to  the  dog  or  public.  The 
mad  dog  scare,  which  has  been  so  long  agitated,  is  a  myth,  and  one  calcu- 
lated to  do  much  injury  by  the  introduction  of  false  hydrophobia  induced 
by  fear.  During  my  long  experience  in  canine  practice  I  have  never  seen 
but  one  case  of  authenticated  rabies.  I  have  been  called  to  see  hundreds 
of  so-called  mad  dogs,  and  found  they  were  merely  in  convulsions,  afflicted 
by  epilepsy  or  suffering  from  an  attack  of  indigestion  or  from  over  excite- 
ment, all  of  which  yield  to  proper  treatment." 

Another  very  able  authority  is  next  given: 

In  the  Animal  World,  Mr.  Rotherhan,  a  canine  practitioner,  describes 
the  differences  between  rabies,  apoplexy  and  epilepsy.  He  says:  "In  rabies 
a  dog  never  foams  at  the  mouth,  its  tongue  and  lips  are  brown  and  hard- 
looking,  the  discharge  from  the  mouth  is  small  in  quantity,  brownish  in 
color  and  hangs  about  the  lips  like  strings  of  gum;  the  eyes  have  an  un- 
natural glare.  In  apoplexy  there  is  sudden  loss  of  power,  the  dog  falls 
down,  either  partially  or  wholly  insensible,  the  eyes  are  fixed  and  blood- 
shot, the  breathing  is  heavy;  there  is  no  unusual  discharge  of  saliva.  In 
epilepsy  the  dog  is  seen  to  tremble  just  as  the  fit  is  coming  on.  If  the  dog 
tries  to  move  he  falls  on  one  side,  his  jaws  begin  to  champ  violently,  all 
voluntary  muscles  are  powerfully  convulsed;  generally  he  utters  sharp,  short 
cries,  but  not  always;  there  is  a  copious  discharge  of  white,  frothy  saliva, 
the  gums  are  of  a  pale  leaden  hue.  When  recovering  from  an  epileptic  fit 
the  dog  has  a  bewildered  look,  the  eyes  having  a  dull  and  stupid  expression." 

So  great  is  the  popular  dread  of  hydrophobia  that  a  slight  derange- 
ment of  the  dog's  nervous  system  is  often  mistaken  for  symptoms  of  rabies, 
while  a  dog  in  convulsions,  in  an  epileptic  fit,  or  stricken  with  apoplexy 
may  be  shot  as  mad — particularly  if  it  be  hot  weather — before  there  is  a 
chance  of  determining  the  nature  of  his  disease.  The  principal  centers 
of  the  nervous  system  are  the  brain  and  the  spinal  cord.  These  Stonehenge 
compares  to  the  electric  telegraph.  The  brain  he  calls  the  central  office. 
From  that  station  are  issued  messages  to  all  parts  of  the  body,  and  the 
wires  which  carry  those  messages  are  the  nerves  of  motion,  the  nerves  of 


188  HYDROPHOBIA 

sensation  and  the  nerves  of  organic  life,  all  of  which  have  their  separate* 
ganglia,   or  the  lesser  station  masters. 

The  normal,  movements  of  the  body  are,  says  a  writer  in  Our  Animal 
Friends,  the  result  of  harmonious,  co-ordinated  functional  activity  of  the 
neuro-muscular  mechanism,  i.  e.,  of  the  nerve  centers,  nerves  and  muscles. 
In  convulsions  the  movements  are  purposeless  and  irregular,  and  are,  of 
course,  wasteful  of  the  animal  energies.  A  dog  may  have  a  fit  from  over- 
exertion in  the  heat  of  the  sun,  from  neuralgic  pains  or  from  toothache,  from 
meningitis,  excessive  fright,  parasites  in  the  nose  or  brain,  acute  ear  dis- 
ease, or  from  the  distress  of  being  lost  in  a  large  city;  or,,  if  a  female,  of 
being  deprived  of  her  whelps.  Recently  it  has  been  shown  that  mental 
distress  has  the  power  to  give  a  dog  diabetes.  It  stands  to  reason  that  so 
sensitive  an  animal  should  never  be  unduly  excited. 

On  no  account  allow  one  dog  to  see  another  in  a  fit.  The  suffering  dog 
should  have  his  head  wet  and  should  be  kept  for  a  time  in  a  dark,  quiet 
place,  free  from  all  excitement.  In  most  cases  of  convulsions  a  small  dose 
of  bromide  of  potassium  will  do  great  good.  Hydrophobia,  considered  as 
a  canine  disease  ,is  decidely  a  misnomer.  The  proper  term  for  canine 
madness  is  rabies.  The  rabid  dog  has  "no  fear  of  water."  On  the  con- 
trary, he  craves  it,  and,  unless  paralyzed,  he  has  no  difficulty  In  swallowing 
it.  Rabies  is  a  specific  disease  of  the  nervous  system.  In  all  cases  there 
is  an  intense  inflammation  of  the  brain  and  spinal  marrow,  ending  in  a 
loss  of  function,  which  is  a  result  common  to  inflamed  glands.  The  mucous 
glands  of  the  stomach  and  bowels,  the  liver,  the  pancreas  and  the  kidneys 
are  all  more  or  less  injected  with  blood;  but  the  salivary  glands  are 
especially  affected,  and  the  secretion  of  saliva  is  greatly  increased.  There 
is  the  furious  or  maniacal  form  of  rabies  and  the  paralytic.  The  paralytic 
is  known  as  dumb  rabies.  Absolutely  typical  cases  of  either  form  are  as 
rare  as  is  the  disease.  Death,  however,  usually  results  in  from  two  to  ten 
days  in  the  furious  form,  while  in  dumb  rabies  the  period  is  much 
shorter. 

The  howl  or  bark  of  a  mad  dog  is  very  remarkable.  It  is  totally  unlike 
his  ordinary  voice,  and  is  sonorous  and  melancholy  to  an  extreme.  No  one 
need  mistake  it.  The  dog's  appetite  is  so  perverted  that  he  will  swallow 
stones,  sticks,  straws  and  almost  any  filth.  His  biting  and  snapping  are 
reflex  actions;  that  should  not  be  regarded  as  deliberate.  It  is  then  that 
he  is  really  dangerous.  Irritability  is  an  advance  stage  of  rabies.  In  the 
earlier  stages  the  animal  is  sullen  and  inclined  to  hide  away  in  corners. 
His  eyes  grow  wild  and  suspicious.  If  at  large  he  will  roam  over  wide 
tracts  of  country  at  a  jog  trot,  with  his  head  down  and  his  tongue  out. 
In  dumb  rabies  there  is  an  entire  absence  of  excitement.  The  muscles  of 
mastication  are  paralyzed  so  that  the  lower  jaw  is  dropped!  there  is  no 
maniacal  stage  at  all. 

Epileptical  convulsions  are  due  to  an  irregular  discharge  of  the  nerve 
cells.  They  occur  unexpectedly,  are  of  variable  duration,  and  the  spasms 
are  of  two  kinds.  A  prolonged  muscular  contraction  is  called  a  tonic  spasm. 
Following  the  tonic  spasm  are  the  clonic  spasm,  which  consist  of  alternate 
contraction  and  relaxation.  The  dog,  like  the  human  subject,  will  froth 
at  the  mouth  and  bite  the  tongue.  Epilepsy  may  be  hereditary,  or  may 
be  due  to  teething  and  worms. 

Apoplexy  differs  greatly  from  epilepsy.  The  convulsions  are  not 
prominent;  the  pupils  of  the  eyes  are  either  contracted  or  dilated;  there 
is  long-continued  unconsciousness  and  more  or  less  paralysis. 

Meningitis,  so  often  mistaken  for  rabies,  is  yet  very  different.  The 
temperature  is  very  much  elevated,  which  it  is  not  in  rabies;  the  dog  snaps, 
but  shows  no  tendency  to  bite,  and  there  is  no  particular  bark  and  howl 
combined,  although  the  dog's  voice  is  high-pitched. 

Phrentitis  is  simply  inflammation  of  the  brain.  It  is  sometimes  a  com- 
plication of  distempers,  and  is  the  only  disorder  which  resembles  rabies. 
It  generally  occurs  in  the  hottest  weather.  The  dog  can  not  propagate 
phrentitis  by  salivary  inocculation. 

"Hydrophobia  in  human  beings,"  says  a  writer,  "results  from  accidents 


HYDROPHOBIA  189 

of  a  nervous  order,  sometimes  mortal,  sometimes  curable,  according  as 
they  derive  from  disorders  analogous  to  tentanus  (lockjaw)  produced  by 
a  wound  or  from  purely  mental  disorders."  According  to  Dr.  Caffe, 
"Spontaneous  rabiform  hydrophobia  is  the  only  rabies  that  exists,  and  that 
is  a  mortal  rabies."  Before  M.  Pasteur's  system  was  invented  about  nine- 
teen persons  annually  were  officially  reported  to  have  died  of  hydropho- 
bia. Now,  strange  as  it  may  seem,  the  number  of  persons  who  annually  re- 
port themselves  bitten  by  rabid  dogs  averages  from  1,500  to  2,000.  Rabies 
is  a  rare  disease,  rarer  today  than  in  the  past,  and  hydrophobia  is  more 
or  less  a  form  of  hysteria.  Were  there  less  talk  about  it,  it  would  be  bet- 
ter for  the  community.  A  little  more  knowledge  of  our  own  nervous  sys- 
tem, a  little  less  ignorance  of  the  dog's,  and  we  shall  be  far  more  likely 
to  escape  hydrophob  a  entirely  than  to  die  from  it  or  to  be  saved  by  inocu- 
lation. 

I  will  now  give  a  most  important  and  valuable  interview  with  the 
famous  medical  expert,  Prof.  Edward  C.  Spitzka,  of  New  York.  Prof. 
Spitzka  declares  the  Pasteur  rabies  theory  and  treatment  a  humbug  from 
start  to  finish,  and  rabies  to  be  a  hoax.  Ex-United  States  Surgeon  General 
Dr.  Wm.  A.  Hammond  indorses  his  decision.  Such  arguments  as  Prof. 
Spitzka's,  a  most  eminent  authority,  should  convince  every  one  who  reads 
it   that  he  is  correct: 

"Although  Pasteur  was  undoubtedly  as  sincere  in  his  work  as  his 
follower,  Paul  Gibier,  doubtless  is  in  dispensing  the  ridiculous  treatment," 
said  Prof.  Spitzka,  "I  am  willing  to  stake  my  reputation  that  there  is  no 
such  disease  as  'hydrophobia,'  or  'rabies,'  in  existence,  and  I  am  further 
impressed  that  the  Pasteur  inoculations  are  injurious.  This  is  not  merely 
my  opinion.  I  have  a  practical  explanation  for  every  statement  I  make, 
and  have  carefully  weighed  every  possible  opposition  to  my  conclusions 
for  a  parallel  consideration. 

"I  am  accordingly  prepared  to  answer  any  criticism.  Of  course,  the 
strongest  retaliation  I  shall  receive  will  be  the  broad  charge  that  I  am 
following  in  the  footsteps  of  the  narrow-minded  opposers  of.  the  Wonderful 
.Tenner  smallpox  vaccination  cPscovery,  on  which  the  Pasteur  treatment 
hinges  its  practicability.  As  to  this  most  enrnent  charge  there  is  no  con- 
nection between  the  two  treatments.  For  while  every  one  acknowledges 
the  existence  of  the  dreadful  smallpox,  the  existence  of  hydrophobia,  or  ra- 
bies, has  never  been  satisfactorily  demonstrated.  I  have  not  myself — nor  has 
any  other  expert  investigator — been  able  to  distinctly  diagnose  a  single 
case  of  the  so-called  malady,  to  my  knowledge.  I  have  often  witnessed 
the  symptoms,  commonly  termed  'rabies,'  but  in  every  instance  these  ex- 
citing observations  have  been  plainly  nothing  more  than  tetanus  symptoms 
of  acute  fevers  and   the  many  forms   of   deadly   blood   poisoning. 

"The  water  theory  is  too  absurd  and  ridiculous  to  have  any  significance. 
There  is  not  an  authority  to  be  found  for  its  assumption.  It  is  yet  to  be 
explained  how  water  could  possibly  have  such  an  effect,  while  all  the 
knowledge  modern  science  has  amassed  goes  to  provide  the  belief  merely  an 
antiquated  superstition,  to  which  some  people  still  cling. 

"When  Pasteur's  boom  was  exploded,  and  the  public  went  wild  with  en- 
thusiasm over  it,  along  with  the  great  majority  of  scientific  men,  I  was 
also  taken  in  by  the  contagion.  At  the  time  I  was  impressed  that  with 
the  increasing  knowledge  gained  in  the  field  of  contagious  and  epidemic 
diseases  generally,  much  substantial  advance  has  not  been  recorded  in 
the  history  of  the  mysterious  rabies,  but  realizing  that  this  was  not  due 
to  neglect  of  the  subject,  I  was  not  surprised  at  the  birth  of  the  Pasteur 
theory. 

"Owing  to  the  terrible  nature  of  the  symptoms  attributed  to  this 
unfounded  malady,  an  attractive  field  of  research  has  been  open  to  those 
animated  by  an  earnest  desire  to  prevent  and  relieve  human  sufferings 
from  the  time  of  the  earliest  civilization.  The  symptoms  are  described  in 
the  works  of  Horace,  Aristotle,  Virgil  and  Plutarch,  in  a  manner  which 
Allows   that    while   the    world    has   advanced    in    all    other    lines    of    medical 


190  HYDROPHOBIA 

science  it  is  pitifully  behind  the  date  in  clinging  to  this  relic  of  the  queer 
superstition  of  ancient  times. 

"Pasteur  was  fascinated — or  shall  I  say  hypnotized? — by  the  sensa- 
tionalism and  mystery  of  the  belief.  It  is  most  likely  due  to  the  latter 
element  that  the  universe  has  not  become  emancipated  from  such  super- 
stitions as  are  involved  in  the  'rabies'  or  hydrophobia  hoax,  which  really 
belong  to  medieval  history. 

"Take  a  practical,  up-to-date  view  of  the  matter.  All  epidemic  dis- 
orders should  be  accompanied  with  evidences  approaching  in  exactitude, 
at  least,  a  degree  of  mathematical  proof.  'Rabies'  has  not,  while  all  others 
have.  The  symptoms  observed  during  life,  as  well  as  the  signs  found  in 
the  dead  body,  in  such  diseases  as  smallpox,  typhus  fever  and  cholera,  for 
instance,  are  characteristic,  decisive  and  constant.  The  symptoms  in  'rabies' 
in  man  are  extremely  vague,  conflicting  and  ,  inconsistent,  and,  further- 
more, post-mortem  study  in  man,  as  well  as  in  canine,  has  yielded  no  re- 
sult of  other  than  negative  value. 

"Much  of  the  observation  made  of  queer-acting  dogs  is  made  through 
optics  disturbed  by  fear,  and  by  persons  who  are  incompetent  to  judge 
what  they  see,  consequently  if  a  canine  froth  at  the  mouth,  run  with  his 
tongue  out  and  carry  his  tail  drawn  under  his  body  he  has  the  rabies,  and 
the  revolver  or  policeman's  polished  baton  is  uncermoniously  called  into 
service. 

"What  nonsense!  Such  signs  have  been  observed  in  dogs  that  have 
merely  been  chased  or  beaten,  or  that  are  afflicted  with  ordinary  canine 
diseases.  What  if  they  are  taken  to  a  water  trough  and  go  into  convulsions 
when  they  see  the  liquid.  They  are  overheated  and  at  a  high  tension 
of  nervous  excitement.  Accordingly  they  conceive  a  craving  for  water,  yet 
in  such  a  state  they  are  unable  to  compose  themselves  sufficiently  to  par- 
take of  it,  and  so  the  unquenchable  craving  throws  them  into  the  dread- 
ful paroxysms  which  decides  their  fate. 

"The  same  explanation  serves  for  the  supposed  sufferers  of  rabies  in 
man.  Any  human  being  suspected  to  be  infected  with  rabies  who  is  men- 
tally weak  enough  to  work  up  a  like  nervous  excitement  to  that  I  have 
j-ust  cited  in  the  canine  will  suffer  parallel  symptoms;  the  others  bitten 
by  so-called  rabid  mad  dogs  will  suffer  no  ill  effects  unless  it  be  from 
blood  poisoning,  infected  by  decayed  teeth  in  the  animal's  mouth.  In  the 
latter  case  the  water  symptoms  do  not  present  themselves  if  the  afflicted 
are  strong  enough  in  mind  to  keep  control  of  their  nervous  systems. 

"I  believe  that  many  of  the  sufferers  who  develop  the  imaginary  dis- 
eases were  bitten  by  animals  suffering  not  from  rabies,  but  from  epilepsy 
or  from  gastro  intestinal  disease;  nay,  even  by  healthy  dogs.  The  serious- 
ness and  oft-times  fatal  influence  of  terror  and  expectant  attention,  fos- 
tered by  the  excitement  of  popular  alarm  is  equally  attested  by  other 
epidemics  of  imitative  nervous  disorder,  and  is  a  familiar  fact  to  those 
who  have  carefully  and  scientifically  studied  the  possible  influences  of 
mind  on  the  body. 

"From  as  far  back  as  the  fifteenth  century,  when  the  Alsatian  pheas- 
ants imagined  they  were  changed  to  wolves,  ran  on  all  fours,  howling 
demonically  and  tearing  children  to  pieces,  and  insisting  that  their  limbs 
be  lopped  off  in  order  to  convince  others  that  the  wolfish  fur  grew 
inward  from  their  skins,  to  the  present  day  when  those  dreading  hydro- 
phobia bark  and  snarl  like  dogs,  mew  and  spit  like  cats  and  are  thrown 
into  convulsions  at  sight  of  water,  the  records  of  the  disorder  are  replete 
to  overflowing  with  delusion,  superstition,  hysteria  and  unconscious  simu- 
lation. 

"The  tragi-comical  case  of  a  number  of  persons  dying  in  the  sixteenth 
century,  after  having  eaten  of  a  pig  that  had  been  bitten  by  a  dog,  which 
in  turn  had  been  bitten  by  another  and  believed  to  be  a  rabid  one,  found 
its  counterpart  a  short  time  ago  in  Russia,  where  a  medical  editor  and  a 
prominent  follower  of  Pasteur  suggested  the  treating  of  a  number  of  per- 
sons in  the  Pasteur  Institute  at  Odessa  for  no  better  reason  than  that 
they  had  partaken  of  milk  from  a  cow  bitten  by  a  suspicious  acting  dog. 


HYDROPHOBIA  191 

"In  order  to  determine  how  great  the  danger  from  'rabies'  was  in 
the  United  States  about  ten  years  ago,  when  Pasteurism  was  popularized 
in  the  country,  I  carefully  followed  up  all  the  newspaper  and  medical  jour- 
nal reports  of  alleged  outbreaks  of  the  malady,  and  in  not  a  single  case 
was  satisfactory  evidence  of  its  existence  obtained.  The  reported  outbreaks 
were  mostly  located  in  or  near  two  centers,  Newark  and  Chicago.  In  the 
epidemic  at  Niles  Centre,  seven  miles  from  Chicago,  which  led  to  a  wild 
hunt  and  slaughter  of  the  innocent  canines  in  that  village,  the  human 
subjects  were  successfully  cured  by  the  'madstone' — a  harmless  species  of 
the  'faith  cure'  in  this  case.  But  the  subsidence  of  the  panic  was  mostly 
due  to  a  sensible  physician  who  declined  to  .make  a  premature  diagnosis. 

"At  Newark,  scientific  tests  were  made,  which  showed  that  neither 
the  persons  dying  of  alleged  'rabies,'  the  dogs  that  had  bitten  them,  nor  the 
children  reputed  to  have  been  saved  by  the  Pasteur  treatment,  had  been 
afflicted  with  any  such  disease. 

"Prof.  Briggs,  of  the  Carnegie  Laboratory,  and  Law,  of  Cornell,  inoc- 
culated  dogs  with  material  from  the  deceased  pound-keeper,  Neall,  as  I 
did   from  the  deceased   Hertlin,  and   in   every  case  with  negative  results. 

"The  veterinarian,  Runge,  kept  the  clogs  bitten  by  the  suspected  animal 
in  .quarantine  for  four  months  and  then  discharged  them  as  not  'rabid.' 
Some  children  bitten  by  the  same  dog  and  not  treated  by  Pasteur  are  today 
known  to  me.  They  are  as  free  from  disease  as  those  who  were  sub- 
jected to  the  treatment. 

"Scores  of  observations  might  be  added  in  bringing  the  review  up  to 
date,  all  of  which  tend  to  show  that  the  cases  reported,  including  the  eight 
Baltimore  victims,  were  not  sufferers  of  any  trumped-up  malady  as  'rabies.' 
From  what  I  have  learned  of  those  of  the  latter  who  died  after  receiving 
the  Pasteur  treatment,  I  should  say  they  were  poisoned,  either  by  the 
inoculations  or  by  ptomaines  from  decayed  teeth  of  the  suspicious  canine 
that  bit  them.  Of  the  others  who  are  believed  to'  have  been  saved  from 
the  dreadful  disease  by  Gibier's  hand,  I  am  satisfied  that  in  biting  them 
the  animal  didn't  happen  to  get  any  of  the  poisonous  saliva  in  the  wound 
or  that  their  systems  were  not  susceptible  to  the  dangers  of  the  Pasteur 
inoculation.  Science  has  proved  that  what  is  harmless  to  some  persons 
may  be  deadly  to  others.  The  followers  of  the  Pasteur  treatment,  how- 
ever,  disregard   this   established   fact. 

"In  Pennsylvania  a  number  of  persons  were  needlessly  rendered  un- 
happy by  a  sensational  report  to  the  effect  that  'rabies'  had  become  epi- 
demic in  one  of  the  State's  prosperous  villages.  A  large  number  of  school 
children  and  several  adults  had  been  infected  by  dog  bites.  After  several 
of  the  children  and  two  of  the  adults  had  died,  the  dog — which  was  a  pet — 
was  located.  The  animal  was  found  to  be  suffering  from  epileptic  fits, 
induced  by  his  having  swallowed  a  chicken  bone.  The  deaths  caused  by 
the  bites  were  undoubtedly  due  to  the  same  cause  as  I  have  explained  in 
regard   to   the   Baltimore  victims. 

"As  a  whole,  in  all  the  cases  reported  as  'lyssa,'  'rabies'  or  'hydropho- 
bia,' it  was  either  not  shown  that  the  subject  had  been  bitten  by  a  dog  at 
all,  or  that  the  dog  had  been  mad  in  the  Pasteur  sense.  Indeed,  the 
errors  that  have  been  committed  in  this  direction  would  be  amusing  were 
it  not  for  other  and  tragical  attendant  features. 

"Let  it  be  inoculated  in  the  public  mind  that  the  sensational  symp- 
toms which  tradition  assigns  to  rabies  are  fictitious,  and,  like  the  fear  of 
water  which  has  given  a  name  to  the  malcondition,  never  occurs  after  the 
bite  of  a  dog;  that  it  is  no  more  possible  for  a  dog  to  inoculate  a  man 
with  the  tendency  to  bark  and  run  on  all  faurs  than  it  is  for  a  man  to 
inoculate  a  dog  with  the  faculty  of  speech  and  an  upright  gait — then  what 
has  been  drifting  through  medical  and  newspaper  literature  as  rabies  would 
disappear. 

"If  once  thoroughly  understood  by  the  people  at  large,  that  supersti- 
tious fear  and  expectant  attention  may  not  alone  develop  serious  nervous 
symptoms,  but,  also  actually  cause  death,  many  who  assume  themselves 
threatened  with  some  rational  ill  effects,  such  as  ptomaine  poisoning  after  a 


192  .  "  HYDROPHOBIA 

dog  bite,  would  cultivate  that  healthful  self-control,  which  was  so  happily 
inoculated  by  Dr.  James  Gordon  Spencer  in  the  Watertown  case,  and  Dr. 
Exton  in  the  Arlington  case." 

Herewith  is  reproduced  Hugh  Dalziel's  entire  treatise  on  this  subject. 
He  is  a  noted  authority  in  England  and  the  author  of  several  books  on 
dogs  and  horses.  You  will  see  that  he  believes  in  hydrophobia,  so  you 
have  now  both  sides  of  the  question  to  read,  ponder  over  and  digest  so  as 
to  get  a  full  and  complete  idea  of  the  matter  in  all  its  bearings; 

"Although  the  symptoms  of  this  terrible  disease  have  long  been  recog- 
nized and  clearly  stated  by  scentfic  men,  there  is  still,  unfortunately,  great 
ignorance  regarding  it  evinced  by  the  general  public — an  ignorance  fraught 
with  much  danger  to  man,  and  the  cause  of  much  cruelty  and  death,  often 
most  brutally  inflicted  on  hundreds  of  poor  dogs,  more  innocent  of  mad- 
ness than  the  frantic  crowd  who  do  their  best  to  hunt  the  poor  frightened, 
nervous  beast  into  that  state. 

"I  have  found  the  prevailing  idea  of  a  mad  dog  to  be  that  of  an 
animal  with  glaring,  bloodshot  eyes,  covered  with  the  froth  of  his  excite- 
ment, and  rushing  wildly  hither  and  thither  in  search  of  man  or  beast 
to  bite;  whilst  a  dog  lost  in  a  crowded  town,  and  excitedly  nervous  finding 
himself  out  of  his  knowledge,  is  often  enough  to  raise  the  croy  of  'a  mad 
dog,'  and  with  many  a  fit  is  a  sign  positive,  and  the  occurrence  of  epilepsy 
has  been   the  incitement  to   canine  murder  in  numberless  instances.  . 

"It  is  quite  true  that  the  disease  produces  great  nervous  excitement, 
and  creates  a  spirit  of  unrest — it  also,  in  the  first  stages  of  its  existence, 
increases  the  flow  of  saliva — but  not  the  emission  of  froth  from  the  mouth, 
which  is  produced  by  the  champing  of  the  jaws  in  an  epileptic  fit;  in  rabies, 
the  discharge  becomes  thick  and  glutinous,  and  the  sufferer  may  be  seen 
paw'ng  at  his  mouth  to  clear  it,  as  though  choked  with  a  bone.  The  dispo- 
sition of  the  dog  is  often  entirely  changed,  and  one  frolicsome  and  fond  of 
being  caressed  may  become  sullen  and  shy,  retiring  into  some  quiet  lair, 
generally  selecting  some  dark  corner,  behind  a  large  object.  If  out  on  the 
march  he  will  rather  evade  man  than  seek  company;  and  although  biting 
furiously  at  all  and  everything  that  obstructs  his  passage,  rarely  going  out 
of  his  way  to  seek  an  enemy.  He  evinces  a  strong  desire  to  tear  and  gnaw 
everything  he  gets  hold  of;  nothing  comes  amiss  to  him,  and  the  dispo- 
sition to  bite  is  shown  by  his  frequently  snapping  at  imaginary  objects 
in  the  air.  Contrary  to  the  generally  received  -opinion,  and  condemnatory 
of  the  name  hydrophobia,  erroneously  given  to  this  disease  in  the  dog,  the 
poor  sufferer  laps  water  greedily  as  long  as  his  power  over  the  muscles  is 
retained,  and  #hen  that  is  gone,  plunges  his  head  into  the  water  to  cool 
his  parched  and  burning  mouth.  In  the  latter  stages,  the  dog  may  have 
convulsions,  but  fits  are  not  a  premonitory,  nor  an  early  symptom,  and  their 
presence,  independent  of  more  certain  evidence  of  rabies,  should  never  give 
rise  to  fear. 

"I  can  not  do  more  than  to  indicate  the  more  prominent  and  well- 
known  certain  symptoms,  and  those  who  wish  for  fuller  information  on 
the  subject  should  consult  the  works  of  Youatt,  and  the  more  recent  book 
of  Dr.  Fleming. 

"Whilst  too  great  care  and  caution  cannot  be  used  in  dealing  with  a 
disease  so  dangerous,  I  wish  to  warn  my  readers  against  that  unnecessary 
and  hysterical  alarm  which  dethrones  the  reason,  and  predisposes  to  the 
gravest  results.  If  there  be  reason  to  suspect  a  dog  of  madness,  if  his 
natural  disposition  appears  changed  without  a  traceable  cause,  if  he  tears 
and  bites  at  his  bedding,  pieces  of  wood,  carpets,  dirt,  etc.,  if  he  be  seen 
to  paw  at  his  mouth  frequently,  whilst  no  obstructive  articles  is  in  his 
throat,  if  at  intervals  he  snaps  and  bites  savagely  at  objects  real  and 
imaginary,  if,  after  these  paroxysms,  he  be  seen  to  stagger  and  fall,  if  he 
show  an  insatiable  thirst — if  any  or  all  of  these  symptoms  be  present,  shut 
him  up  where  he  can  do  no  harm,  and  call  in  to  your  aid  a  verterinary 
surgeon.  By  allowing  Him  to  study  the  case,  you  will  do  a  public  good; 
for  fortunately,  cases  of  rabies  are  very  rare,  and  it  is  only'  by  the  careful 


HYDROPHOBIA  193 

investigation    of   them   by   men   specially   educated    to   undertake    the   duty, 
that  we  can  ever  hope  to  discover  a  cure. 

"Among  the  numerous  superstitions  that  hang  like  clouds  round  ca- 
nine madness,  obscuring  any  possibility  of  a  clear  view  of  it,  1  will  refer 
to  one  only,  most  of  them  being  altogether  unworthy  of  notice.  It  has 
long  been  a  popular  belief  that  a  person  bitten  by  a  dog,  even  if  the. ani- 
mal be  in  perfect  health  at  the  time,  is  never  safe  from  an  attack  of 
rabies  so  long  as  the  dog  lives;  for  it  is  held,  that  should  the  dog  become 
mad  at  any  future  period,  however  distant,  the  person  bitten  will  also  fall 
a  victim  to  the  disease.  Cases  supposed  to  prove  that  rabies  may  be  com- 
municated by  a  dog  free  from  it  are  constantly  cropping  up,  and  I  know 
of  a  case  of  a  woman  who  is  said  to  have  died  from  hydrophobia,  caused 
by  the  bite  of  a  dog  that  was  clearly  proved  to  be  free  from  rabies  at  the 
time,  and  has  remained  so  ever  since.  The  woman,  it  appears,  was  in  an 
upper  room  with  her  child,  and  the  entrance  of  a  small  dog  so  alarmed 
her  for  her  child's  safety  that  she  seized  the  intruder  and  threw  it  out  of 
the  window,  and  was  bitten  in  the  struggle;  the  woman  was  taken  ill  and 
died,  showing  all  the  symptoms  of  hydrophobia,  and  the  surgeon  who  at- 
tended her  certified  that  death  was  from  that  disease.  1  do  not  intend  to 
dispute  the  opinion  thus  given,  but  I  venture  to  say  had  the  whole  facts 
of  the  case  been  carefully  investigated,  say,  by  a  jury  of  physicians  of 
experience,  it  would  have  proved  that  the  bite  of  that  dog  had  but  a  small 
share  in  causing  the  woman's  death.  To  me  it  appears  as  reasonable 
to  believe  that  the  dog  could  have  bitten  the  woman  without  being  in  the 
same  room  with  her,  as  that  the  bite  could  communicate  rabies  when  the 
disease  did  not  at  that  time  exist.  Such  cases  should  not  be  passed  by, 
but  thoroughly  sifted  by  qualiled  men,  that  the  truth  might  be  elicited  and 
the  fears  of  the  nervous  allayed.  The  practical  lesson  to  be  learned  from 
this  is,  care  and  caution  in  dealing  with  dogs,  especially  strange  ones,  and 
to  curb  unnecessary  alarm,  which  often  brings  about  the  evil  it  would 
avoid.  When  an  accident  does  occur,  have  the  wound  promptly  cauterized 
to  its  full  depth  with  caustic,  and  let  nervous,  in  addition,  obtain  medical 
advice. 

"I  recommend  those  having  much  to  do  with  dogs  to  carry  in  the 
pocket  at  all  times  one  of  those  wooden  cases  of  caustic  which  costs  but 
sixpence,  and  with  this  safeguard  about  them,  and  the  presence  of  mind 
and  nerve  to  use  it  promptly  and  thoroughly — taking  care  the  caustic 
reaches  as  deep  as  the  tooth  did — the  bite  even  of  a  mad  dog  will  do  them 
no  harm. 

"Since  the  above  was  written,  ten  years  ago,  rabies  in  dogs  has  un- 
fortunately been  rather  frequent,  and  a  few  years  ago  from  the  number 
of  deaths  from  hydrophobia,  caused  by  the  bites  from  mad  dogs,  quite  a 
panic  arose,  with  the  result  that  the  attention  of  medical  men  and  vet- 
erarians  at  home  and  abroad  has  been  very  much  directed  to  its  nature; 
as  yet,  however,  no  cure  has  been  discovered,  and  I  see  no  reason  to 
alter  what  I  have  already  said;  but  it  will  be  useful  very  briefly  to  notice 
one  or  two  points  of  special  interest.  Latest  researches  seem  to  point 
conclusively  that  the  rabid  poison  exists  in  the  saliva,  and  in  none  of  the 
other   secretions. 

"Although  its  propagation  by  a  bite  or  by  the  poisoned  saliva  coming 
in  contact  with  an  abraised  or  highly  vascular  surface  are  clearly  enough 
the  means  of  transmission  and  propagation,  how  it  originates  is  unknown; 
exposure  to  great  heat,  feeding  on  salt  meat,  compelled  abstinence  from 
water,  and  many  other  causes,  have  been  suggested  as  a  producing  cause, 
but  proved  not  to  be  so.  The  old  notion  that  it  is  peculiarly  a  disease  of 
the  dog  days,  is  fabulous,  nor  is  it  connected  with  the  functions  of  procrea- 
tion, further  than  the  present  law  in  this  country  permits  owners  of  bitches 
when  in  season  to  be  fought  over  by  excited  males,  furnishes  excellent  op- 
portunities for  its  spread  as  well  as  being  an  insult  to  decency.  It  is  the 
duty  of  men  who  keep  dogs  to  have  some  knowledge  of  their  nature,  and 
the  law  should  punish  the  ignorance  or  carelessness  that  causes  an  offense 
and  a  danger  to  the  public. 


194  HYDROPHOBIA       • 

"Unfortunately  no  cures  are  yet  known;  such  things  as  the  Birling 
and  the  Webb's  cures,  and  other  pretended  family  secrets  may  be  swept 
aside.  Medical  men  have  tried  every  conceivable  drug,  and  a  few  years 
ago  it  was  thought  that  a  specific  had  been  found  in  curari,  but  it  proved 
delusive.  Hot  and  vapor  baths  have  their  votaries,  just  as  half  drowning  in 
Crib,  a  pool  in  the  Severn,  was  at  one  time  believed  in. 

"Preventive  measures  are  alone  to  be  relied  on,  and  the  very  old  one 
of  the  Greeks,  sucking  the  part,  is  excellent,  and  a  small  instrument  has 
been  invented  which  can  be  easily  used;  it  is  like  an  old-fashioned  breast 
exhauster,  with  the  bell-shaped  head  and  long  tube,  but  with  a  round  bell 
half  way  up  the  tube  as  well,  which  of  course  receives  all  that  the  operator 
sucks  out  of  the  wound  and  renders  him  quite  free  from  danger.  It  is 
made  by  a  chemist  in  York,  and  can  be  bought  through  Maw,  Son  &  Com- 
pany,  Aldergate  street,   London." 

Here  is  a  sensible  article  on  hydrophobia,  published  in  Man's  Best 
Friend,  being  an  interview  with  'John  P.  Haines,  of  New  York  City,  the 
President  of  the  American  Society  for  the  Prevention  of  Cruelty  to  Ani- 
mals, a  man  who  has  had  considerable  experience: 

"Hydrophobia  is  one  of  the  rarest  of  diseases,  and  it  is  the  height  of 
folly  to  imagine  that  every  dog  that  happens  to  suffer  intensely  from  the 
heat  is  either  mad  or  in  danger  of  going  mad.  A  mad  policeman  is  every 
bit  as  dangerous  as  a  mad  dog,  and  probably  in  the  past  quite  as  many  of 
the  former  as  of  the  latter  have  been  mad." 

"Mr.  Haines  quotes  from  high  authorities  when  he  says  that  in  ninety- 
nine  cases  out  of  a  hundred  the  poor  brute  which  is  destroyed  while  sup- 
posedly in  the  throes  of  rabies  is  merely  suffering  from  excitement  which 
will  cur?  itself,  and  that  a  person  bitten  by  an  animal  under  such  circum- 
stances is  absolutely  in  no  danger  of  serious  results  unless  he  permits  him- 
self to  become  a  victim  of  his  own  disordered  imagination.  Mr.  Haines  is 
himself  authority  for  the  statement  that  the  cases  of  death  from  hydropho- 
bia reported  from  time  to  time  are  wrongly  diagnosed,  and  that,  as  a  rule, 
they  result  simply  from  worry.  The  weather  has  nothing  to  do  with  the 
case,  although  no  doubt  dogs  are  less  liable  to  sickness  in  cold  weather  than 
during  the  hot  spell,  a  state  of  affairs  due  perhaps  almost  as  much  to  the 
thoughtlessness  or  ignorance  of  their  owners  as  to  the  weather  conditions. 

"A  dog  that  has  been  properly  fed  and  is  being  so  fed,  will  suffer 
much  less  discomfort  than  another  which  has  been  stuffed  with  food  calcu- 
lated to  heat  the  blood,  and  such  a  dog  is,  and  especially  when  not  over- 
weight, far  more  liabel  to  escape  illness  than  the  fat,  badly-conditioned 
animal  that  is  quite  'above  himself,'  and  ready  to  go  wrong  at  any  time. 

"What  are  the  dog  days?  They  are  the  heated  term  in  July  and  Au- 
gust, during  which  dogs  are  supposed  to  be  peculiarly  liable  to  rabies,  or 
canine  madness.  That  is  one  answer,  but  there  is  a  better.  There  are  no 
dog  days,  because  there  is  no  time  of  the  year  when  dogs  are  especially 
liable  to  rabies.  There  are  no  more  cases  of  rabies  in  July  and  August 
than  in  December  and  January.  Moreover,  rabies  is  one  of  the  rarest  of 
canine  diseases.  When  you  hear  a  cry  of  'Mad  Dog!'  the  chances  are 
many  thousands  to  one  that  the  dog  is  not  mad.  When  you  read  in  the 
papers  of  someone  being  bitten  by  a  mad  dog  the  chances  are  thousands 
to  one  it  is  not  true.  A  person  bitten  by  a  mad  dog  is  not  doomed  to 
die  a  fearful  death  by  hydrophobia.  Not  at  all,  for  hydrophobia  in  a  hu- 
man being  is  much  more  rare  than  rabies  in  a  dog.  Expert  physicians 
who  have  given  special  attention  to  the  subject  are  convinced  that  hydro- 
phobia is  never  caused  by  the  bite  of  a  dog,  but  is  simply  a  hysterical 
nervous  disease  caused  by  an  unfounded  dread.  Don't  take  this  for  grant- 
ed;   but   remember   these    facts: 

"First,  That  there  are  more  than  a  million  chances  to  one  that  any 
dog  which  is  supposed  to  be  mad  is  not  mad  at  all;  second,  that,  in  all 
probability,  any  dog  by  which  a  person  may  happen  to  be  bitten  is  not 
mad;  and  third,  that  even  if  a  person  is  bitten  by  a  dog  that  is  really 
mad,   the  danger  of  hydrophobia  is  very  slight  indeed. 

"If  you  will  note  the  following  facts  you  will  probably  find  them  to 


HYDROPHOBIA  195 

be  quite  different  from  the  popular  fancies  by  which  most  persons  are  mis- 
led. It  is  supposed  that  a  mad  dog  dreads  water.  It  is  not  so.  The  mad 
dog  is  very  likely  to  plunge  his  head  to  the  eyes  in  water,  though  he 
cannot  swallow  it,  and  laps  it  with  difficulty.  It  is  supposed  that  a  mad 
dog  runs  about  with  evidences  of  intense  excitement.  It  is  not  so.  The. 
mad  dog  never  runs  about  in  agitation;  he  never  gallops;  he  is  always 
alone,  usually  in  a  strange  .place,  where  he  jogs  along  slowly.  If  he  is 
approached  by  a  dog  or  man  he  shows  no  signs  of  excitement,  but  when 
the  dog  or  man  is  near  enough  he  snaps  and  resumes  his  solitary  trot. 
If  a  dog  barks,  yelps,  whines  or  growls,  that  dog  is  not  mad.  The  only 
sound  a  mad  clog  is  ever  known  to  emit  is  a  hoarse  howl,  and  that  but 
seldom.  Even  blows  will  not  extort  an  outcry  from  a  mad  dog.  There-' 
fore*,  if  any  dog,  under  any  circumstances,  utters  any  other  sound  than 
that  of  a  hoarse  howl,  that  dog  is  not  mad.  It  is  supposed  that  the  mad 
dog  froths  at  the  mouth.  It  is  not  so.  If  a  dog's  jaws  are  covered  or 
flecked  with  white  froth,  that  dog  is  not  mad.  The  surest  of  all  signs  that 
a  dog  is  mad  is  a  thick  and  ropy  brown  mucous  clinging  to  his  lips,  which 
he  often  tries  vainly  to  tear  away  with  his  paws  or  wash  away  with  wa- 
ter. If  your  dog  is  bitten  by  any  other  dog,  watch  him  carefully.  If  he 
is  infected  by  rabies  you  will  discover  signs  of  it  possibly  in  from  six  to 
ten  days.  Then  he  will  be  restless,  often  getting  up  only  to  lie  down 
again,  changing  his  position  impatiently,  turning  from  side  to  side,  and 
constantly  licking  or  scratching  some  part  of  his  head,  limbs  or  body. 
He  will  be  irritable  and  inclined  to  dash  at  other  animals,  and  he  will 
sometimes  snap  at  objects  which  he  imagines  to  be  near  him.  He  will  be 
excessively  thirsty,  lapping  water  eagerly  and  often.  Then  there  will  be 
glandular  swellings  about  his  jaws  and  throat,  and  he  will  vainly  endeavor 
to  rid  himself  of  a  thick,  ropy,  mucous  discharge  from  his  mouth  and 
throat.  If  he  can,  he  will  probably  stray  away  from  home  and  trot  slowly 
and  mournfully  along  the  highway  or  across  the  country,  meddling  with 
neither  man  nor  beast,  unless  they  approach  him,  and  then  giving  a  single 
snap.  The  only  exception  to  this  behavior  occurs  in  ferocious  dogs,  which, 
during  the  earlier  stage  of  excitement,  may  attack  any  living  object  in 
sight.  These  symptoms  of  rabies  are  condensed  from  valuable  information 
received    from   physicians   of   undoubted   authority." 

The  following  interesting  article  was  written  by  Mrs.  Sarah  K.  Bol- 
ton, the  eminent  authoress,  who  has  written  many  books  on  animals,  and 
who  is  a  great  friend  of  dogs,  is  clearly  entitled  to  space  in  this  book. 
Mrs.  Bolton's  last  book,  "Our  Devoted  Friend,  the  Dog,"  should  be  read 
by  every  dog  lover.  It  is  published  by  L.  C.  Page  &  Co.,  Boston,  Mass.- 
Send  and  get  it. 

"Almost  weekly  or  monthly  in  summer  we  have  a  'mad  dog'  scare. 
Some  dog  has  been  frothing  at  the  mouth,  which  is  never  a  sign  of  rabies, 
but  of  sickness  or  a  fit;  is  chased  by  a  crowd  and  after  crawling  under 
some  porch  or  shed  for  protection,  is  killed  by  the  random  and  numerous 
shots   of  some   policemen. 

"We  ought  to  learn  from  the  experience  of  others  that  there  is  very 
little  danger  from  the  bite  of  a  dog.  Let  any  person  ask  a  dozen  men 
if  they  have  ever  been  bitten  by  a  dog  and  probably  more  than  half  will 
say  yes,  in  boyhood  or  later  in  life,  with  no  evil  results  whatever. 

"Dr.  Gordon  Stables,  a  prominent  Englishman,  says:  'All  my  life  I 
have  been  among  dogs.  I  have  written  five  books  on  them.  I  have  han- 
dled as  many  as  30,000  dogs  a  year.  I  have  been  bitten  very  often,  and 
care  no  more  for  a  bite  than  I  do  for  the  scratch  of  a  pin;  yet  I  have 
never  seen  a  case  of  rabies,  and  I  do  not  believe  such  exists.' 

"Surgeon  General  Thornton  says:  'I  have  served  in  India  for  thirty- 
five  years,  and  was  for  many  years  in  medical  charge  of  a  large  Indian 
district,  with  a  population  of  2,000,000.  Six  dispensaries  where  about 
100,000  people  were  treated  annually  were  under  my  superintendence, 
yet,  although  dog  bites  were  frequent,  I  never  met  a  single  case  of  hydro- 
phobia in  a  native  Indian,  and  I  believe  that  the  experience  of  others  who 
have  been  civil  surgeons  in  India  is  similar  to  mine.' 


19G  iTYDROPITOmA. 

"Dr.  Stockweii,  a  celebrated  authority  on  dog  disease,  says:  'Distem- 
per, toothache,  earache,  epilepsy  and  the  whole  class  of  nervous  diseases  to 
which  dogs  are  subject  are  constantly  taken  for  rabies.  Personally,  after 
moio  than  thirty  years'  experience  as-  a  dog  owner  and  student  of  canine 
and  comparative  medicine,  I  have  yet  to  meet  with  a  genuine  case  of  rabies 
in  the  dog,  and  of  some  scores  of  so-called  rabid  dogs  submitted  to  me 
for  inspection  I  have  found  one  and  all  to  be  suffering  from  other  and 
comparatively    innocent   diseases.' 

"Dr.  Charles  W  .Dulles,  the  eminent  lecturer  on  the  History  of  Medi- 
cine at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  says:  'After  16  years  of  investigation' 
'he  has  failed  to  find  a  single  case  of  hydrophobia  'that  can  be  conclusively 
proved  to  have  resulted  from  the  bite  of  a  dog  or  any  other  cause.' 

Dr.  Dulles  says  in  regard  to  thej.reatment  of  a  dog  bite:  "I  am  strong- 
ly opposed  to  the  practice  of  cauterizing  with  silver  nitrate.  I  have  seen 
and  treated  very  many  dog  bites,  and  have  not  used  lunar  caustic  for  13 
years,  and  no  person  that  I  have  treated  has  yet  developed  hydrophobia, 
or  that  the  mortality  of  those  treated  by  me  is  less  than  that  of  those 
treated  in  Pasteur  institutes.  My  treatment  is  simply  through  surgical 
cleaning  and  the  application  of  a  simple  antiseptic  dressing  for  a  few 
days,  with  the  positive  assurance  that  there  will  be  no  danger  of  any  dis- 
ease." 

Dr.  Irving  C.  Rosse  says  in  a  paper  read  before  the  American  Neuro- 
logical Association,  Philadelphia,  June  3,  1895:  "In  Asia  Minor  and  in 
Constantinople,  the  home  of  pariah  dogs,  one  never  hears  of  hydrophobia. 
The  secretary  of  the  Japanese  legation  in  Washington  tells  me  that  he  has 
never  known  of  the  disease  in  Japan,  and  that  in  Korea,  with  more  dogs 
than  any  other  country,  such  a  thing  as  hydrophobia  is  unheard  of.  In 
London,  with  its  five  and  one-half  million  inhabitants?  but  one  case  was 
reported  in   1892." 

Dr.  Dulles  finds  from  statistics  gathered  in  the  United  States,  that 
there  is  only  one  hydrophobia  case  to  four  million  inhabitants.  Of  267  per- 
sons in  the  U.  S.  bitten  by  dogs  supposed  to  be  rabid,  he  says  only  eight 
persons  have  died.  • 

Many  of  the  best  physicians  recommended  hot  water  baths  for  dog 
bites,  as  is  done  in  India,  rather  than  the  Pasteur  system,  with  its  great 
expense  and  doubtful  results.  Professor  Peter,  the  able  editor  of  the  French 
Medical  Journal,  says:  "M.  Pasteur  does  not  cure  hydrophobia — he  gives 
it!"  A  physician  describes  the  system  as  the  "inoculating  usually  wholly 
uncontaminated  human  beings  with  the  most  terrible  virus  known  to  science 
— to-wit,  that  of  hydrophobia." 

"The  Pasteur  advocates  admit  that  only  from  5  to  10  per  cent  of  per- 
sons bitten  by  a  rabid  animal  ever  have  hydrophobia,  with  no  treatment 
whatever.  The  writer  of  this  article  has  been  bitten  several  times,  and 
would  never  allow  the  wound  to  be  cauterized. 

"Even  if  there  be  such  a  disease  as  hydrophobia  in  man,  which  is 
probably  blood  poisoning  (  a  thorn  of  a  rose,  the  prick  of  a  pin,  the  scratch 
of  a  baby's  finger  nail,  the  point  of  a  lead  pencil  stuck  behind  the  ear,  the 
cut  on  the  neck  of  a  stiff  linen  collar  have  all  produced  blood  poisoning), 
and  if  there  be  such  a  disease  as  rabies  in  a  dog,  which  is  probably  dis- 
temper or  epilepsy,  it  does  not  seem  to  be  found  among  the  homeless  or 
unlicensed  dogs,  or  those  that  roam  the  streets,  which  are  the  ones  killed 
from   the  cruel   supposition    that   they  especially  are   dangerous. 

"Dr.  Matthew  Woods,  of  Philadelphia,  says:  'At  the  Philadelphia  dog 
pound,  where,  on  an  average,  over  6,000  vagrant  dogs  are  taken  up  an- 
nually, and  where  the  catchers  and  helpers  are  frequently  bitten,  not  one 
case  of  hydrophobia  has  occurred  during  its  entire  history  of  2  5  years,  in 
which  time  150,000  dogs  have  been  handled.' 

"At  the  dog  shelter  in  New  York  City  the  Superintendent  told  me  he 
had  been  bitten  over  a  hundred  times  and  paid  no  attention  to  it  what- 
ever. In  killing  50,000  unlicensed  dogs  each  year,  to  the  great  shame  of  an 
indifferent  money-getting  city,  New  York  has  not  found  one  case  of  rabies. 
London,   Eng.,    kills   nearly   the   same   number,    and   has   not   seen   a   case 


HYDROPHOBIA  "  ~  197 

among  its  unlicensed  clogs.  Among  the  thousands  of  dogs  killed  after  the 
brutal  muzzling  order  in  Washington,  n.  C,  last  year  not  one  case  of  rabies 
was  found.  Let  the  poor  people  keep  dogs.  They  are  good  companions  for 
their  children,  and  do  not  lead  to  the  workhouse  or  the  jail.  They  are  the 
best  guard  for  our  houses  where  there  are  no  police;  indeed  cheaper  than 
policemen,  and  usually  more  easily  found  when  wanted.  We  spend  money 
to  give  playgrounds  and  entertainments  for  children,  and  that  Is  well,  but 
their  dogs  give  them  more  comfort,  usually,  than  almost  any  other  one 
thing,  as  boys  and  girls  will  universally  testify. 

"Let  the  dogs  live.  The  cars  will  necessarily  kill  some.  They  are  not 
long  lived  at  the  best.  They  give  us  devotion,  companionship,  and  ought 
to  make  us  kinder  and  more  gentle,  from  their  helplessness  and  dependence 
upon  us.  They  are  good  friends,  to  some  very  unfeeling  people.  Do  not 
chain  them  up.  Repeal  our  cruel  laws.  Let  us,  a  professedly  Christian  city, 
be  as  humane  as  the  unchristian  Turk,  or  the  worshipers  of  Buddha  in 
India.  Let  us  honor  ourselves  by  doing  justice  to  the  speechless.  Let  the 
dogs  live." 

Here  I  give  a  cure  for  hydrophobia,  a  clipping,  from  a  paper: 

"The  time  between  the  biting  of  an  animal  by  a  mad  dog  and  the  show- 
ing signs  of  hydrophobia  is  not  less  than  nine  days,  but  may  be  nine  months. 
After  the  animal  has  become  rabid  the  scratch  of  a  tooth  upon  a  person  or 
slobber  coming  in  contact  with  a  sore,  or  raw  place,  will  produce  hydropho- 
bia just  the  same  as  if  bitten  by  a  mad  dog. 

"Hydrophob'a  can  be  prevented,  and  I  will  give  what  is  known  to  be 
an  infallible  remedy  for  man  and  beast  if  properly  administered.  A  dose 
for  a  horse  or  cow  should  be  four  times  as  much  as  for  a  person.  It  is 
not  too  late  to  give  the  medicine  any  time  before  the  spasms  come  on. 
The  dose  for  a  person  is  one  and  one-half  ounces  of  elecamnane  root  bruised, 
put  in  a  pint  of  new  milk,  reduced  one-half  by  boil'ng;  take  all  at  once  in 
the  morning,  fasting  until  the  afternoon,  or  at  least  a  very  light  diet  until 
several  hours  are  passed.  The  second  dose  same  as  first,  except  take  two 
ounces  of  the  root.  The  third  same  as  the  second.  Three  doses  are  all 
that  are  needed  and  there  need  be  no  fear,  as  I  know  from  my  own  experi- 
ence, and  know  of  numbers  of  cases  where  it  was  entirely  successful.  This 
is  no  guesswork.  The  persons  alluded  to  had  been  bitten  by  their  own  dogs, 
which  were  then  tied  up  to  see  if  they  were  really  mad.  They  proved  to  be 
mad  and  the  remedy  was  successful.  A  physician  told  me  he  had  known 
of  the  use  of  this  remedy  for  over  thirty  years  and  never  knew  it  to  fail 
when  properly  administered.  He  related  a  case  where  a  number  of  cows 
were  bitten,  and  penned  half  in  one  pen  and  half  in  another;  to  half  the 
remedy  was  given  and  were  saved.     The  other  half  died  from  hydrophobia." 

Let  us  not  become  insane  on  the  hydrophobia  question.  Let  the  dogs 
have  plenty  of  water,  don't  tie  them  up  in  hot  weather,  and  don't  make  the 
poor  animals  chase  for  miles  after  a  bicycle,  carriage  or  electric  car  on  a  hot 
•and  dusty  road.  If  there  is  a  spectacle  humiliating  to  those  who  wish  to 
respect  their  fellow  man.  it  is  the  sight  of  a  dog,  in  the  last  stages  of  ex- 
haustion, struggling  to  keep  up  with  some  vehicle  upon  which  his  selfish 
master  is  taking  his  ease,  unmindful   of  ils  misery. 

The  following  article  was  written  by  D.  E.  Salmon,  D.  V.  M.,  Chief  of 
the  Bureau  of  Animal  Industry,  in  the  Yearbook  of  the  Department  of 
Agriculture,  issued  at  Washington,  D.  C,  and  as  will  be  seen,  he  is  a  firm 
believer  in  rabies.  I  reproduce  it  as  authority  from  the  other  side  of  the 
question. 

This  is  the  concluding  speech  to  the  jury  by  the  "Prosecuting  Attorney," 
whose  duty  it  is  to  always  find  the  prisoner  guilty: 

"The  symptoms  of  rabies  are  such  as  we  should  expect  from  serious 
disease  of  the  central  organs  of  the  nervous  system:  F'rsr,  Irritation;  sec- 
ond, paralysis  and  death.  The  rabies  virus  appears  to  have  little  effect  upon 
the  system  until  it  reaches  the  brain  and  spinal  cord.  There  it  multiplies, 
sets  up  irritation,  and  finally  interrupts  the  functions. 

"Rabies  is  generally  divided  into  two  forms:  First,  furious  rabies; 
second,  dumb  rabies.     In  the  former  the  animal  is  irritable,  aggressive,  and 


198  ,  •      HYDROPHOBIA 

bites  nearly  every  object  which  comes  its  way;  in  the  latter  the  muscles  of 
its  jaw  are  paralyzed  almost  from  the  first  appearance  of  symptoms,  and 
being  unable  to  bite,  the  animal  remains  more  quiet  and  tranquil.  Essen- 
tilly  the.  two  forms  of  the  disease  are  the  same,  but  owing  to  the  parts 
of  the  brain  attacked  and  the  acuteness  of  the  attack,  paralysis  appears 
much  sooner  in  one  of  these  forms  than  in  the  other.  The  saliva  from  a 
case  of  dumb  rabies  is  just  as  dangerous  and  virulent  as  that  from  a  case 
of  furious  rabies.  The  dogs  with  dumb  rabies  are  less  dangerous  simply 
because  they  are  unable  to  bite  and  thus  insert  their  saliva  into  a  wound. 

"The  impression  should  not  be  formed  that  dumb  rabies  and  furious 
rabies  always  represent  two  distinct  types  of  disease,  and  that  one  may  at 
a  glance  classify  every  case  as  belonging  to  one  or  the  other  of  these  types. 
Quite  the  contrary.  The  typical  cases  belong  to  the  two  extremes  of  symp- 
toms, and  there  are  all  graduations  between  the  two.  In  fact,  almost  every 
case  of  furious  rabies  sooner  or  later  change  into  the  dumb  form,  that  is, 
the  final  stage  of  rabies  is  almost  invariably  paralytic,  and  the  dumb  form 
in  its  typical  development  occurs  when  the  paralysis  appears  on  the  first  day 
of  the  disease.  The  paralysis  may  not  appear,  however,  until  the  second, 
or  third,  or  some  subsequent  day. 

"Again  ,a  dog  does  not  necessarily  bite  everything  about  it  even  though 
it  has  rabies  and  its  jaws  are  not  paralyzed.  It  may  be  combative  and 
furious  all  of  the  time,  or  only  a  part  of  the  time,  or  not  at  all.  There  is 
no  disease  in  which  the  symptoms  vary  more  than  in  rabies  of  the  dog, 
and  it  is,  consequently,  impossible  in  any  description  of  moderate  length 
to  give  an  idea  of  the  different  forms  under  which  it  may  appear. 

Furious  Rabies. 

"Fleming  has  well  said  that  it  is  a  great  and  dangerous  error  to  sup- 
pose that  the  disease  commences  with  signs  of  raging  madness,  and  that 
the  earliest  phase  of  the  malady  is  ushered  in  with  fury  and  destruction. 
The  symptoms  appear  very  gradually,  and  at  first  there  is  only  the  slightest 
evidence  of  brain  disease.  The  animal's  habits  and  behavior  are  changed. 
It  may  be  more  restless  and  affectionate  than  usual,  seeking  to  be  near  its 
master  or  mistress,  fawning,  licking  the  hands  or  face",  and  apparently  seek- 
ing for  sympathy  or  assistance.  Such  caresses  are,  however,  extremely 
dangerous,  for  the  animal's  tongue,  moist  with  virulent  saliva,  coming  in 
contact  with  a  part  where  the  skin  is  thin,  abraded,  or  wounded,  may  fatally 
infect  the  person  with  whom  it  is  endeavoring  to  demonstrate  its  affection. 
The  smallest  abrasion  may  be,  as  Bouley  has  impressively  said,  a  door 
opened  to  death;  and  such  a  death!  The  instances  in  which  hydrophobia 
has  developed  from  such  inoculations  are  very  numerous,  and  everyone 
should  be  warned  against  this  kiss  of  affection,  which  carries  with  it  not 
only  death,  but  sufferings  which  are  far  more  to  be  dreaded  than  the  fatal  . 
termination. 

•  "In  most  cases  dogs  first  become  dull,  gloomy,  morose,  taciturn,  seek- 
ing solitude  and  isolation  in  out-oMhe-way  places,  or  retiring  under  pieces 
of  furniture.  But  in  this  retirement  they  can  not  rest;  they  are  uneasy 
and  agitated;  they  lie  down  and  assume  the  attitude  of  repose,  but  in  a 
few  minutes  are  up  again,  walking  hither  and  thither,  'seeking  rest,  but 
finding  none.'  Occasionally  this  restlessness  may  disappear  for  a  time,  and 
the  animal  become  lively  and  affectionate;  oftener  it  sinks  into  a  sullen 
gloominess,  from  which  even  its  master's  voice  rouses  it  but  temporarily. 
It  becomes  more  and  more  desperate  in  its  efforts  to  prepare  a  comfortable 
bed,  pawing  or  scattering  the  straw,  or,  if  in  a  house,  scratching,  tumbling 
and  tearing  cushions,  rugs,  curtains,  carpets  and  everything  of  that  kind 
within  its  reach. 

"At  this  period  dogs  may  have  aberrations  of  the  senses,  of  the  sight, 
hearing,  and  feeling,  which  cause  hallucinations  and  lead  them  to  think 
that  they  are  being  annoyed  by  something,  or  that  some  animal  or  person 
is  endeavoring  to  injure  them.     They  crouch,  ready  to  spring  upon  an  ene- 


HYDROPHOBIA  199 

my;  they  rush  forward  and  snap  at  the  air;  they  throw  theselves,  howling 
and   furious,  against  a  wall,  as  though  they  heard  sounds  beyond   it. 

"While  at  first  the  affected  dog  may  not  be  disposed  to  bite,  it  be- 
comes more  dangerous  as  his  hallucinations  and  delirium  increase.  The 
voice  of  the  master  or  of  an  acquaintance  may  dispel  the  aberrations  tem- 
porarily and  lead  him  to  friendly  demonstrations,  but  an  unexpected  move- 
ment or  touch  may  bring  on  another  access  and  lead  to  a  quick  and  un- 
expected bite. 

"The  disturbance  of  the  sensations  leads  to  chills  and  itching.  If  the 
place  where  the  bite  occurred  is  accessible  the  dog  licks  the  scar,  and 
later  bites  and  tears  the  tissues.  This  tearing  of  the  flesh  is  not  always 
confined  to  the  site  of  the  inoculation,  but  certain  regions  of  the  body 
appear  to  lose  their  sensitiveness,  and  at  the  same  time  to  convey  to  the 
brain  the  sensation  of  itching.  The  animal  in  this  case  bites  into  its  own 
flesh   with  apparent  pleasure  and   satisfaction. 

Such  animals  take  food  until  the  disease  is  considerably  advanced, 
if  it  is  something  which  can  be  swallowed  without  mastication;  other- 
wise it  is  dropped  after  remaining  a  short  time  in  the  mouth. 

"Difficulty  in  swallowing  is  an  early  symptom,  and  frequently  leads 
the  unsuspecting  owner  to  conclude  that  the  animal  has  a  bone  in  his 
throat.  A  dog  which  appears  to  have  a  bone  in  his  throat  is  on  general 
principles  one  of  the  most  dangerous  animals  in  existence.  The  supposed 
bone  may  be  there,  but  on  the  other  hand  the  symptoms  which  lead  to  this 
supposition  may  be  due  to  partial  paralysis  caused  by  rabies,  and  the  owner 
may  be  inoculated  with  the  virulent  saliva  while  thrusting  his  finger  or 
hand  in  the  dog's  mouth  to  discover  a  bone  which  has  no  existence  but  in 
his   imagination. 

"It  is  commonly  believed  that  mad  dogs  have  fear  of  water  and  are 
unable  to  drink,  but  there  could  be  no  greater  mistake.  In  this  respect  they 
differ  entirely  from  the  human  patient.  They  have  no  fear  or  dread  of 
water,  but  continue  to  drink  until  paralysis  has  progressed  so  far  that 
they  are  no  longer  able  to  swallow.  The  fact  that  a  suspected  dog  is 
seen  to  drink  or  to  wade  into  a  stream  is  consequently  no  evidence  that 
he  is  not  mad. 

"When  the  furious  symptoms  come  on,  the  dog  leaves  his  home  and 
goes  upon  a  long  chase,  with  no  apparent  object  in  view  other  than  to  be 
traveling  onward.  He  trots  at  a  rapid  pace,  eye  haggard,  tail  depressed, 
indifferent  to  his  surroundings.  He  flies  at  and  bites  dogs  and  persons 
whom  he  meets,  but  usually  does  not  apparently  search  for  them,  or  even 
notice  them  if  they  remain  quiet.  Dogs  in  this  condition  may  travel  many 
miles,  and  finally  drop  from  exhaustion  and  die.  Often  after  an  absence 
of  a  day  or  two  they  return  to  their  home,  exhausted,  emaciated,  covered 
with  dust  and  blood,  and  presenting  a  most  forlorn  and  miserable  appear- 
ance. Those  who  have  pity  for  such  an  animal  and  try  to  make  it  clean 
and  comfortable,  are  in  great  danger  of  being  bitten,  for  the  disease  has 
advanced  to  a  point  where  the  delirium  or  insanity  is  most  marked,  and 
where  a  treacherous  bite  is  most  common.  Doubtless  the  clog  has  no  in- 
tention of  injuring  a  friend,  and  would  not  do  so  did  he  net  see  that 
friend  transformed  by  his  disordered  vision  into  some  distorted  and  un- 
recognizable shape,  which  he  thinks  is  about  to  injure  him.  But  while 
we  may  give  the  dog  due  credit  for  not  intentionally  and  deliberately 
inoculating  his  friends  with  his  fatal  virus,  let  us  not  forget  that  the 
inoculation  is  no  less  deadly  because  it  is  the  result  of  the  abnormal  working 
of  a  disordered  mind.  Whatever  the  sentiment  may  be  which  leads  the  dog 
to  turn  upon  his  master  or  mistress  and  inflict  an  injury,  the  duty  remains 
the  same  for  the  owner  to  take  due  precautions  to  prevent  such  an  oc- 
currence. 

"If  the  animal,  instead  of  being  allowed  to  escape,  is  kept  confined, 
the  paroxysms  of  fury  are  seen  to  occur  intermittently,  or,  in  the  absence 
of  provacation,  they  may  be  entirely  wanting.  If  excited,  it  howls,  rushes 
upon  objects  that  are  thrust  toward  it,  or  throws  itself  against  the  bars  of 
its  cage  and  bites  with  great  fury. 


200  HYDROPHOBIA 

"As  death  approaches,  the  animal  becomes  exhausted  and  scarcely 
able  to  stand;  the  eyes  are  dull  and  sunken,  and  the  expression  is  that  of 
pain  and  despair.  Paralysis  appears  in  the  jaws  or  in  the  posterior  ex- 
tremities and  extends  rapidly  to  other  parts  of  the  body.  The  animal,  be- 
ing unable  to  stand,  lies  extended  upon  its  side;  the  respiration  becomes 
more  and  more  difficult;  there  are  spasmodic  contractions  of  certain  groups 
of  muscles,  complete  prostration,  and  death. 

"The  ordinary  course  of  the  disease  is  four  or  five  days;  it  may  be 
as  short  as  two  or  as  long  as  ten  days. 

Dumb  Rabies. 

"When  this  form  of  the  disease  is  typical,  it  comes  on  with  restless- 
ness, depression,  a  tendency  to  lick  objects,  and.  paralysis  of  the  muscles, 
which  close  the  jaws.  As  a  consequence  of  the  paralysis,  the  lower  jaw 
drops,  the  animal  is  unable  to  close  the  mouth,  the  tongue  hangs  out,  and 
an  abundance  of  saliva  escapes.  The  mucous  membrane  of  the  mouth  be- 
comes dry,  discolored,  and  covered  with  dust.  The  animal  remains  quiet, 
does  not  respond  to  provocations,  and  appears  to  understand  its  helpless- 
ness.    As  Bouley  has  said,  the  animal  cannot  bite  and  does  not  desire  to  bite. 

"When  dumb  rabies  follows  a  period  in  which  the  animal  has  been 
affected  with  the  furious  form,  the  desire  and  tendency  to  bite  may  be" 
retaine  deven  after  the  jaw  is  paralyzed. 

"The  course  of  the  disease  is  short,  death  usually  occurring  in  from 
two  to  four  days. 

"The  dumb  form  of  rabies  is  very  common,  and  many  persons  know 
it  as  'drop  jaw'  who  have  no  idea  of  its  true  nature. 

"Many  of  the  common  mistakes  with  reference  to  rabies  arise  from 
an  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  symptoms.  It  is  on  this  point  that  there 
is  greatest  need  of  educational  work.  Bouley  has  most  earnestly  warned 
us  to  'distrust. a  dog  when  it  shows  signs  of  illness;  every  sick  dog  should 
as  a  rule  be  suspected;  more  particularly  distrust  a  dog  when  it  be- 
comes dull,  morose  and  seeks  for  solitude,  which  appears  not  to  know 
where  to  rest,  which  is  always  on  the  move,  prowling,  snapping  at  the 
air,  and  suddenly  barking  at  nothing  when  all  around  is  perfectly  still, 
whose  countenance  is  somber,  and  only  assumes  its  usual  animated  ex- 
pression by  brief  starts;  beware  of  the  dog  that  seeks  and  scrapes  inces- 
santly, and  exhibits  aggressive  movements  against  phantoms;  and,  finally, 
beware,  above  all,  of  the  dog  which  has  become  too  fond  of  you,  and  is 
continually  endeavoring  to  lick  the  hands  or  face." 

The  Period  of  Incubation  of  Rabies. 

The  period  of  incubation  of  a  contagious  disease  is  the  time  which 
elapses  between  the  inoculation  or  exposure  and  the  appearance  of  the  first 
symptoms.  With  rabies  this  period  varies  remarkably.  It  may  be  as  short 
as  six  or  seven  days,  and  it  occasionally  exceeds  one  hundred  days.  In 
rare  cases  it  has  been  reported  on  good  authority  that  a  year,  or  even 
fourteen  months,  elapsed  between  the  time  the  animal  was  bitten  and  the 
time  when  the  disease  manifested  itself.  The  majority  of  cases  develop 
in  from  three  to  seven  weeks. 

During  the  greater  part  of  the  period  of  incubation  the  infected  animal 
is  healthy,  and  would  not  cause  disease  in  any  animal  or  person  which  it 
bites.  The  saliva  may  become  virulent,  however,  two  or  three  days  before 
the  appearance  of  the  first  symptoms,  and  any  animal  or  person  bitten  after 
the  contagion  has  contaminated  the  saliva  is,  of  course,  liable  to  contract 
the  disease. 

There  is  a  very  erroneous  and  rather  stupid  belief,  quite  common,  to 
the  effect  that  if  a  dog  bites  a  person  and  becomes  mad  at  any  time 
thereafter  the  person  so  bitten  will  contract  hydrophobia.  This  fallacy 
may  have  arisen   from  some  Instance  In  which  a  person  had   been  bitten 


HYDROPHOBIA  201 

within  a  few  days  of  the  appearance  of  the  symptoms  of  disease  in  the 
dog,  and  when  the  saliva  was  already  virulent.  However  this  may  be, 
it  is  perfectly  certain  that  a  dog  can  not  convey  this  disease  when  he 
does  not  have  it  or  before  he  has  himself  contracted  it.  If,  therefore,  a 
dog  does  not  show  symptoms  of  rabies  within  a  week  from  the  time  the 
bite  is  inflicted  there  is  no  danger  of  the  person  contracting  the  disease. 
The  only  possibility  of  an  exception  to  this  rule  is  the  very  doubtful  one, 
that  in  extremely  rare  instances  a  dog  may  have  rabies  and  recover  from 
it  without  showing  characteristic  symptoms.  A  very  few  cases  of  this 
kind  have  been  observed  among  dogs  artificially  inoculated,  but  it  has 
not  yet  been  shown  that  their  saliva  became  virulent,  or  that  similar  cases 
occur  under  natural  conditions.  The  fact  remains,  however,  that  a  person 
is  in  no  danger  of  contracting  rabies  because  a  healthy  dog  has  bitten  him, 
which   dog   is   afterward   inoculated    with   rabies." 

The  following — that  I  found  in  some  paper,  is  too  good  to  leave  out 
of  this  book: 

"It  is  a  pleasure  to  note  that  Superintendent  Frael  of  the  New  York 
Department  of  Health  comes  out  flat-footed  regarding  the  extreme  rarity 
of  rabies,  asserting  that  what  people  suffer  from  is  false  or  pseudo  rabies 
brought  about  by  scare.  He  draws  attention  to  the  fact  that  during  the 
life  of  the  New  York  Society  for  Prevention  of  Cruelty  to  Animals,  which 
was  started  in  1894,  no  less  than  three  millions  of  dogs  and  cats  have  been 
handled.  That  the  employes  engaged  in  the  work  of  collecting  the  strays 
number  about  thirty,  and  on  an  average  everyone  of  them  is  bitten  four 
times  every  month,  or  fifty  times  a  year,  and  that  some  of  the  dogs'  were 
subsequently  declared  by  the  local  authorities  to  be  rabid.  On  this  basis 
of  computation  there  has  been  thirty  thousand  bites  by  all  sorts  of  ani- 
mals and  one  hundred  and  fifty  different  men  have  been  employed  during 
the  twenty  years,  yet  not  a  single  case  of  hydrophobia  has  resulted,  all  that 
the  men   did  being   to  cleanse  the  wound  thoroughly  and  have  it  dresseu. 

Of  course,  we  clog  people,  those  of  us  who  have  had  the  greatest  ex- 
perience Avith  dogs,  have  always  held  similar  views,  and  your  correspon- 
dent's very  simple  remedy  has  for  years  been  to  turn  the  water  faucet  on 
the  wound,  so  as  to  thoroughly  cleanse  it,  and  while  this  is  being  done, 
get  someone  to  take  bicarbonate  of  soda,  always  to  be  found  in  every  house- 
hold, or  if  not,  then  common  baking  powder,  and  make  a  creamy  paste, 
which  spread  on  a  clean  piece  of  linen  and  put  that  on  the  wound  and  then, 
bind  it.  After  a  while  the  emulsion  will  dry,  but  pour  a  little  water  on 
the  binding,  so  as  to  soak  to  the  dressing,  and  that  will  do.  You  will 
have  no  feeling  of  anything  wrong  and  there  is  little  question  that  it  is 
this   feeling   of   something   wrong   that  causes  this   pseudo-hydrophobia. 

Dog  men  cannot  be  too  emphatic  in  telling  people  not  to  be  afraid 
of  a  dog  bite,  and  if  the  United  States  would  only  pass  a  law  to  hang, 
draw  and  quarter  every  managing  editor  of  a  paper  that  published  a  mad 
dog  story,  every  doctor  who  told  a  patient  or  suggested  to  a  patient  the 
possibility  of  hydrophobia  and  towed  the  Pasteur  institutes  out  to  the 
middle  of  the  Atlantic  and  sunk  them  with  all  hands,  that  would  end 
rabies  and  the  hydrophobia  scare." 

And  now  read  this:  ' 

"The  late  Dr.  Michel  Peter,  the  greatest  clinical  expert  of  France, 
said:  'Pasteur  does  not  prevent  hydrophobia;  he  gives  it.'  This  opinion 
was  indorsed  by  such  scientific  leaders  as  Dr.  T.  M.  Dalon,  F.  R.  C.  S.,  Sir 
Benjamin  Ward  Richardson,  Dr.  Charles  Bell-Taylor,  Surgeon-General 
Charles  Gordon,  of  England,  and  Professor  VonFrisch,  of  Vienna.  The 
celebrated  Dr.  A.  Lutaud,  editor-in-chief  of  the  'Jouranl  de  Medecine  de 
Paris,'  said  in  that  journal  on  September  16,  1899,  referring  to  the  savants 
at  the  Pasteur  Institute:  'They  have  not  diminished  the  mortality;  they 
have  augmented  it,  in  creating  the  'madness  of  laboratories,'  very  often 
fatal,   with   which   they   have   inoculated   a   great   number   of  individuals.'  " 


202  HYDROPHOBIA 

THE  LAST  GREAT  CASE  OF  HYDROPHOBIA. 

The  man  who  wrote  the  following,  that  I  found  in  a  magazine  called 
"Everything,"  and  I  wish  I  knew  the  author's  name,  so  as  to  credit  him 
properly,  (and  also  to  shake  his  hand,  has  a  great  brain,  and  full  of  com- 
mon sense),  so  here's  the  article,  well  worth  reading: 

"For  one  time  in  six  thousand  years  as  far  as  history  records  one 
man  suffered  death  from  hydrophobia  caused  by  a  dog  licking  his  hand. 
That  is  the  story  sent  out  and  that  is  the  story  that  has  caused  the  world 
to  talk  and  inspired  newspapers  to  write  terrible  head  lines  about  what  to 
expect  next.  We  do  not  believe  that  any  man  ever  died  from  hydrophobia 
caused  by  a  dog  licking  his  hand.  In  truth,  outside  of  those  who  make 
their  money  in  that  way  there  is  grave  doubt  as  to  whether  there  is  any 
such  thing  as  hydrophobia  outside  the  patient's  mind.  If  a  man  can  be 
hypnotized  by  another  man  and  made  to  think  that  he  is  a  dog;  and  bark 
and  howl;  or  be  made  to  think  he  is  a  millionaire  or  a  dancing  master,  as 
people  have  been  hypnotized,  then  a  man  can  hypnotize  himself,  if  he  has 
the  power  of  hypnotism,  and  it  is  not  a  far  cry  to  believe  that  a  man  who 
has  been  bitten  or  a  man  who  never  saw  a  dog  can  hypnotize  himself  and 
make  believe  that  he  has  rabies,  so-called  and  so  defined;  and  die  in  the 
throes  of  agony. 

In  a  recent  number  of  Dumb  Animals,  that  sterling  paper  published 
by  George  T.  Angel,  a  writer  in  some  other  newspaper  was  copied.  His 
name  was  J.  M.  Greene,  and  his  article  was  addressed  to  The  Editor  of  the 
Tribune  and  is  worth  reading.  We  do  not  know  anything  about  the  Pasteur 
Institute  he  describes,  but  we  do  know  that  hydrophobia  is  essentially  ex- 
aggerated.     Mr.    Greene    said: 

"Much  has  been  written  lately  in  the  press  regarding  the  great  dan- 
ger from  the  prevalence  of  'hydrophobia'  in  New  York  city  and  elsewhere, 
and  much  more  of  the  same  terror  will  doubtless  be  written  before  the 
season  is  far  advanced.  Will  you  allow  me  a  brief  space  for  a  few  ideas 
on  this  subject? 

"In  the  first  place,  if  there  be  any  one  point  absolutely  certain  and 
established,  it  is  that  the  danger  of  getting  the  above  disease  has  been 
greatly  exaggerted,  and  that  the  great  majority  of  alleged  cases,  of  not 
only  'hydrophobia'  in  man,  but  also  'rabies'  in  the  dog,  have  been  cases  of 
some  other  disease.  It  is  also  easy  to  see  whence  comes  the  influence 
causing  this  dread  and  delusion.  The  year  following  the  opening  of  the 
first  'Pasteur  Institute'  in  Paris,  in  1885,  the  number  of  'hydrophobia'  pa- 
tients treated  in  that  city  leaped  to  three  thousand;  previous  to  that,  Paris 
could  boast  of  only  about  thirty  'cases'  a  year!  True  'hydrophobia'  is  a 
disease  so  rare  that  it  is  not  considered  worth  mentioning  in  mortality  re- 
ports. Well  known  medical  investigators  who  have  been  searching  for 
many  years  for  authentic  cases  have  failed  to  find  one.  Such  are  Dr. 
Lutaud,  of  Paris;  Dr.  Bell-Taylor,  of  England;  Dr.  Charles  W.  Dulles,  of 
Philadelphia;  Dr.  E.  C.  Spitzke,  of  New  York;  Professor  J.  W.  Hearn, 
of  Philadelphia;  Dr.  Hiram  Corson  and  Dr.  Thomas  Mayo.  It  is  a  notor- 
ious fact  that,  all  over  the  world,  societies  and  institutes  that  have  the 
handling  of  thousands  of  vicious  dogs,  frequently  biting  their  keepers, 
never  hear  of  the  disease. 

"But  spurious  cases,  caused  by  nervous  dread,  are  common.  As  in 
the  case  of  Mme.  Chevalier,  of  Paris,  instances  have  occurred  from  'sug- 
gestion' alone,  where  the  patient  has  not  been  bitten  at  all!  Such  cases,  it  is 
no  injustice  to  say,  are  the  product  of  the  morbid  fear  disseminated  and 
fostered  by  'Pasteur  Institutes.'  These  concerns  do  a  great  business 
throughout  the  world.  But  on  what  basis?  I  have  before  me  a  record, 
carefully  revised  from  year  to  year,  which  shows  that  up  to  January 
1st  of  the  present  year  1,857  deaths  from  'hydrophobia'  have  occurred 
among  patients  who  have  undergone  the  'Pasteur  treatment'  according 
to  directions,  in  many  of  which  cases  the  animals  which  did  the  biting 
remained  alive  and  well!  In  this  record  names,  dates,  and  other  particu- 
lars are  given. 


HYDROPHOBIA  203 

"The  'Pasteur  method'  depends  for  its  commercial  success  on  the 
most  colossal  pretensions  and  distortion  of  facts  and  figures.  Among  its 
'patients'  are  numbered  those  bitten  by  'rabid'  dogs  and  those  bitten  by 
animals  only  'suspected!'.  Again,  dogs  are  often  'found'  to  have  been 
rabid  by  postmortem  examination  and  by  inoculating  other  animals  with 
portions  of  their  brain  or  spinal  cord,  both  of  which  methods  are  denounced 
as  inconclusive  by  leading  scientists,  such  as  Dr.  Colin,  of  Alfort,  and  Pro- 
fessor Fleming,  of  England.  Many  substances,  such  as  common  soap, 
when  inoculated  into  animals,  produce  meningitis,  the  symptoms  of  which 
are  almost  identical  with  those  of  rabies;  Surgeon-General  Sternberg  has 
even  produced  these  symptoms  in  rabbits  with  his  own  saliva!  Moreover, 
it  is  well  known  that,  with  no  treatment  whatever,  from  90  to  9  5  per  cent 
of  those  bitten  by  actually  'rabid'  dogs  recover.  All  these  facts  tend  to 
show  that  the  statistics  of  the  'Pasteur  Institutes'  are  absolutely  farcical, 
and  as  a  consequence  they  are  ridiculed  by  every  leading  scientific  author- 
ity who  has  carefully  investigated,  and  who  charge  them  with  actually 
causing  'hydrophobia'  in  many  patients  by  their  inoculations  with  diseased 
animal  matter.  This  pernicious  and  most  dangerous  principle  of  deliber- 
ately introducing  into  the  life-current  septic  matter  from  'rabid'  animals, 
has  without  doubt  been  the  cause  of  numerous  cases  of  'paralytic  rabies' 
or  'laboratory  rabies'  in  patients.  The  late  Dr.  Michel  Peter,  the  greatest 
clinical  expert  in  France,  said:  'Pasteur  does  not  prevent  hydrophobia; 
he  gives  it.'  This  opinion  was  indorsed  by  such  scientific  leaders  as  Dr. 
T.  M.  Dalon,  F.  R.  C.  S.,  Sir  Benjamin  Ward  Richardson,  Dr.  Charles 
Bell-Taylor,  Surgeon-General  Charles  Gordon,  of  England,  and  Professor 
Von  Frish,  of  Vienna.  The  celebrated  Dr.  A.  Lutaud,  editor-in-chief  of  the 
'Journal  de  Medecine  de  Paris,'  said  in  that  journal  on  September  16, 
1899,  referring  to  the  savants  at  the  Pasteur  Institute:  "They  have  not 
diminished  the  mortality;  they  have  augmented  it,  in  causing  the  'mad- 
ness of  laboratories,'  very  often  fatal  with  which  they  have  inoculated  a 
great  number  of  individuals.' 

"As  the  clanger  of  'hydrophobia'  in  man  has  been  viciously  exag- 
gerated, so  has  been  that  of  'rabies'  in  the  dog.  It  is  safe  to  say  that  at 
least  99  out  of  every  100  alleged  cases  are  cases  of  ill  treatment,  heat 
prostration,  fits,  thirst,  stomach  trouble,  epilepsy,  or  similar  affections. 
A  dog  with  true  'rabies'  does  not  froth  at  the  mouth;  neither  does  he  go 
out  of  his  way  to  attack,  but  gives  every  indication  of  wishing  to  be  let 
alone.  These  facts,  however,  have  no  weight  with  some  people,  whose 
arrogance  and  bigotry  regarding  our  relation  to  the  'lower  animals'  pass 
comprehension.  One  swears  the  life  of  one  child  is  'worth  all  the  dogs  in 
the  world;'  another  would  have  all  the  clogs  in  the  state  muzzled  on  ac- 
count of  one  case  of  alleged  'rabies.'  Man  spends  his  life  in  abusing  and 
slaughtering  his  fellow-creatures;  but,  for-sooth,  if  some  unfortunate  mem- 
ber of  that  species  most  faithful  to  man,  wild  with  ill  treatment,  or  the 
disease  above  mentioned,  rushes  he  knows  not  whither,  beset  by  imagin- 
ary foes,  then  Man  joyfully  seizes  the  opportunity  to  attack  the  sufferer 
with  every  convenient  weapon,  as  in  former  days,  under  like  conditions, 
he  treated  his  fellow-man!  And  then,  if  bitten  by  his  victim,  he  resorts 
to  an  'institute,'  founded  on  and  perpetuating  the  horrible  sufferings  of 
artificially  maddened  creatures  (a  supply  of  which,  in  a  state  of  madness 
is  constantly  kept  on  hand,  whether  'used'  or  not),  whose  poisoned  tissues 
he  absorbs  into  his  circulation  as  an  antidote.  Is  not  this  a  specacle  for 
Gods  and  men?" 

There  is  no  doubt  in  this  world  but  what  two-thirds  of  the  Na- 
tional Belly-aching  is  the  direct  result  of  imagination.  There  is  no  doubt 
but  what  if  a  man  can  hypnotize  another  man,  if  he  has  the  power  he 
can  and  does  hypnotize  himself,  and  if  this  be  true,  and  it  is  an  accepted 
truth,  then  all  some  nerve-wracked  fellow  has  to  do  who  insists  that  some- 
thing is  the  matter  with  him,  is  to  imagine  that  a  clog  bit  him  and  then 
keep  following  up  the  idea  and  finally  die  like  a  dog  might  die  with 
rabies.      That   is    the    long    and    the    short   of    the   matter    in    this    world 


204  r   I  I  i  HYDROPHOBIA 

where  Wall-Eyed  Science  is  on  the  make  and  whe«re  men  must  earn  their 
bread. 

The  man  who  owns  pets  and  loves  his  pets  is  a  bigger  man  and  a 
better  man  than  the  narrow  souled  and  incomprehensible  creature  who 
is  too  stingy  to  feed  them  or  too  mean  to  want  to  give  them  a  place  after 
God  Almighty  formed  and  fashioned  them  and  sent  them  here  for  some 
good    purpose. 

Hydrophobia  is  a  dream — a  self  hypnotic  state  aided  and  abated  by 
those  who  want  to  cash   the  coin.      That's  all. 

I  hope  my  readers  have  read  all  of  the  many  pages  devoted  to  hydro- 
phobia, (and  these  pages  could  have  been  put  in  this  book-as  advertise- 
ments at  $35.00  per  page  just  as  well,)  as  there  was  no  trouble  in  getting 
the  ads — but  this  book  was  written  to  do  good  to  dogs — and  their  owners — 
much  in  preference  to  the  profits  in  coin — because  it  is — has  been — and 
will  be  my  highest  aim  in  life,  to  do  good  to  dogs — the  best,  truest,  and 
faithful  friend  we  have — four  legs  instead  of  two. 


MISCELLANEOUS  205 


AN  ASSORTMENT  OF  CURES 


For  Troubles  a  Dog  May  Have,  That  May  Not  be  Found  Under  Headings 
Elsewhere  of  Regular  Diseases. 


Dogs  Eating  Their  Own  Filth. — I  have  a  fox  terrier  bitch  puppy,  eight 
months  old,  that  has  a  disgusting  habit  of  eating  her  own  droppings,  also 
those  of  other  dogs;  will  pick  them  up  and  drag  them  into  the  kennel.  I 
have  tried  everything  that  I  could  think  of  to  stop  the  practice.  She  is 
large  and  healthy,  but  must  have  some  trouble  with  her  stomach  or  she 
would  not  do  as  she  does.  I  have  six  dogs  and  they  never  offer  to  do  what 
she  appears  to  delight  in.  She  will  make  her  deposit  and  then  turn  around 
and  eat  it  right  after  I  have  got  through  feeding  her.  I  feed  twice  a  day. 
What  can  I  do  to  stop  that  filthy  habit?     Whipping  does  no  good. 

Answer. — Watch  her  closely  and  cover  the  feces  with  powdered  cayenne 
pepper. 

What  can  I  do  for  my  twenty-months-old  greyhound?  About  two 
months  ago  I  noticed  he  would  eat  his  own  and  other  droppings,  Including 
manure;  have  tried  pepper,  and  also  sulphur  and  lard,  but  to  no  purpose. 
Treated  him  with  Dent's  Vermifuge,  but  have  not  noticed  any  worms.  He 
eats  well  and  has  plenty  of  exercise,  but  seems  to  get  thinner  every  day, 
and  lately  will  lie  down  after  a  little  run.     He  has  a  little  matter  In  his  eyes. 

Answer. — «ive  him,  before  meals,  three  times  a  day.  a  pill  containing 
nux  vomica  one-half  grain,  gentian  four  grains,  sulphate  of  iron  three  grains; 
after  meals  give  him  a  grain  of  pure  pepsin. 

Catarrh. — What  can  I  do  for  my  hound?  He  sneezes  about  all  the  time 
and  discharges  at  the  nose.  I  have  tried  several  remedies  without  success. 
He  eats  well  and  is  bright  and  active. 

Answer. — Take  equal  parts  of  distilled  water  and  listerine  and  spray 
into  the  nostrils  twice  daily.      (See  Catarrh.) 

Sore  Mouth. — What  will  cure  my  dogs?  I  have  lost  recently  six  or 
eight  very  fine  dogs.  They  have  very  sore  mouths  and  ropes  of  saliva  run 
from  their  mouths;  they  can  not  eat  anything  or  even  drink  water;  they 
lick  their  fore  feet  all  the  while,  and  finally  die  after  great  suffering. 
Some  people  call  it  slobber  disease,  and  I  have  tried  every  remedy  I  can 
hear  of,  such  as  chlorate  of  potash,  alum,  borax,  sage  tea  and  honey,  none 
of  which   did  any  good. 

Answer. — A  malignant  form  of  sore  mouth.  Take  five  grains  of  per- 
manganate of  potash  to  one  ounce  of  distilled  water  and  wash  the  diseased 
parts  three  times  daily.  Feed  milk  and  raw  eggs.  (See  also  Canker  of  the 
Mouth.) 

Urticaria,  or  Nettle  Rash. — My  pointer  dog,  nine  months  old,  scratches 
and  bites  himself  a  great  deal;  his  ears  are  thick  and  leathery  and  quite 
hot  and  red  inside;  his  eyes  are  red  and  much  matter  and  watery  discharge 
from  them;  he  has  a  very  offensive  smell  about  him  all  the  time;  he  smells 
worse  and  scratches  most  when  in  a  warm  room;  very  small  breakings  out 
come  between  his  forelegs,  which  heal  up  and  disappear  in  a  few  days; 
his  a,ppetite  is  good.  I  feed  him  corn  bread  and  milk,  table  scraps  and  a 
little  cooked  meat.  He  grows  fast  and  is  fat  enough.  I  keep  him  tied 
except  for  an  hour  or  so  each  day.     Please  name  disease  and  prescribe. 

Answer. — Urticaria,  nettle  rash;  stop  feeding  corn  and  substitute 
cooked  turnips,  beats  and  cabbage;  take  oil  of  tar  four  ounces,  alcohol 
four  ounces,  cottonseed  oM  eight  ounces,  mix  and  apply  all  over  the  body 


206  MISCELLANEOUS 

for  six  consecutive  days,  giving  a  bath  on  the  seventh  day;  repeat  treatment 
if  necessary.  For  four  consecutive  mornings  give  one  ounce  of  castor  oil 
and  twenty  drops  of  cascara  segrada. 

Sore  Feet. — What  can  I  do  for  my  beagle  bitch,  two  and  a  half  years 
old,  who  eats  well  and  seems  well,  but  her  feet  get  sore,  sometimes  be- 
tween the  toes  and  sometimes  under  the  toes? 

Answer. — Make  a  strong  decoction  of  white  oak  bark,  and  bathe  the 
feet  with  it  twice  daily. 

Sore  on  Ear. — My  dog  has  a  large  sore  on  the  outside  of  his  ear,  caused 
by  constant  rubbing.  What  would  you  prescribe?  I  have  used  carbolic 
salve,  but  this  seems  to  make  him  want  to  scratch  all  the  more.  I  have 
tied  his  hind  legs  together  but  he  bites  off  the  cord,  and  when  I  put  any- 
thing over  his  head  he  works  it  off. 

Answer. — Cleanse  the  sore  with  warm  water  and  soap,  and  apply  the 
tincture  of  iodine  ounce,  or  use  Spratt's  Locurium,  a  great  healer. 

To  Dry  up  Milk. — My  bitch's  puppies  died  at  birth.  What  shall  I  do? 
Bitch  has  bag  full  of  milk. 

Answer. — Rub  the  bag  with  camphorated  oil,  especially  if  the  teats 
are  hardened.  Another  remedy  is  alcohol,  four  ounces  to  a  quart  of  water. 
Do  not  draw  off  the  milk  now,  as  that  encourages  the  secretion.  (See  also 
Caked  Breast.) 

Sores  on  Hips  and  Hocks. — Setter  has  sores  on  hips  and  hocks;  has 
been  troubled  with  them  some  time. 

Answer. — Apply   boracic   acid    ointment.       (See   also    Sores.) 

Goitre. — I  have  on  my  hands  what  I  suppose  is  a  case  of  goitre;  the 
dog  is  five  months  old,  but  the  protuberance  on  the  throat  is  developing 
very  rapidly.  What  can  I  do  to  remove  it  as  speedily  as  possible  without 
injury? 

"Paint  with  iodine  once  daily  and  give  internally,  if  a  small  dog,  one 
grain,  and  if  a  fair-sized  dog,  two  grains  of  iodide  of  potash  three  times 
daily   for  two  weeks." 

Sore  Feet.-^— My  English  setter  dog,  three  years  old,  feet  get  sore  when 
I  work  him;  they  get  feverish  and  matter  is  discharged  from  between  the 
toes.      What  shall   I  do? 

"Paint  dog's  feet  with  a  solution  of  sulphate  of  copper,  one  dram  to  the 
ounce  of  water." 

Antidote  for  Strychnine  Poisoning. — What  would  be  the  most  effective 
antidote  one  could  carry  while  on  a  hunt  in  case  of  strychnine  poisoning  of 
the  dogs? 

Answer. — Give  an  emetic  if  possible,  then  give  from  twenty  to  thirty 
grains  of  chloral  hydrate,  administered  by  the  rectum;  after  giving  the 
injection,  bring  pressure  on  the  anus  to  prevent  its  expulsion.  (See 
Poisoning.) 

Inflammation  of  the  Lungs. — Please  prescribe  for  my  pointer  bitch,  six 
years  of  age,  which  has  every  symptom  of  inflammation  of  the  lungs.  I  gave 
her  a  large  dose  of  oil,  which  she  threw  up  without  any  action.  After 
taking  her  temperature  (104)  I  gave  her  an  injection  of  soap  suds  and  she 
passed  a  stool  that  was  hard  and  showed  evidence  of  fever.  I  then  gave 
her  two  grains  of  calomel  and  am  now  giving  her  one  drop  of  aconit  every 
hour  to  reduce  the  temperature.  She  breathes  very  hard  and  staggers  and 
runs  sidewise  when  in  motion,  and  saliva  runs  constantly  from  her  mouth. 
Gave  a  feed  of  soft  bread  with  a  few  scraps  of  beef  chopped  into  it. 

Answer. — Give  her  two  grains  of  quinine  every  three  or  four  hours 
and  use  small  doses  of  stimulants,  such  as  a  teaspoonful  of  brandy,  four 
or  five  times  a  day;  keep  up  her  appetite  by  chopped  raw  beef  and  gelatin, 
beef  broths,   etc.      (See  Lungs,  Inflammation   of.) 

Chronic  Constipation. — English  setter,  age  seven  and  one-half  years, 
weight  fifty-two  pounds,  has  been  constipated  for  a  long  time;  it  is  almost 
impossible  for  him  to  make  a  stool;  in  doing  so  he  slides  all  over  the  street 
without  accomplishing  much,  and  when  successful  the  stool  is  very  hard.  I 
have  been  relieving  him  occasionally  by  doses  of  physic.     I  saw  slight  traces 


MISCELLANEOUS  '       207, 

of  blood  in  his  stool  on  November  12.  He  is  a  ravenous  eater  and  hunts 
well  all  day.     Please  prescribe. 

Answer. — Feed  him  largely  on  oatmeal  and  cornmeal;  give  occasional 
doses  of  castor  oil,  and  three  times  a  day  give  fifteen  grains  of  the  hypo- 
sulphite of  soda  and  one-fourth  grain  of  nux  vomica.     (See  Constipation.) 

Chorea. — Diagnose  and  prescribe  for  an  English  setter,  weight  fifty 
pounds,  aged  three  years,  who  had  chorea.  It  is  chronic  and  confined  to 
one  side  of  his  head;  that  is  ,to  the  brain  on  one  side  of  the  center  of  his 
head;  there  is  a  decided  and  noticeable  rise  and  fall  on  the  affected  side 
of  the  skull,  but  nowhere  else  in  his  body.  I  have  tried  mild  remedies,  and 
at  times  have  reduced  the  disease,  but  on  stopping  the  medicine  the  trouble 
would  commence.  Kindly  prescribe  something  powerful  that  will  strike  at 
the  root  of  the  disease. 

Answer. — Give  internally  the  following:  Fluid  extract  of  nux  vomica 
thirty  drops,  fluid  extract  ergot  two  and  one-half  drams,  iodide  of  potash 
one  dram,  water  to  make  two  ounces;  give  a  teaspoonful  twice  a  day  for 
four  days,  then  three  times  a  day  for  two  weeks.     (See  Chorea.) 

Antidote  for  Strychnine. — I  noticed  in  a  recent  issue  the  query.  What 
is  best  to  carry  to  antidote  strychnine  poison,  when  shooting.  I  have 
saved  many  clogs  in  the  field  and  in  different  sections  where  I  have  lived 
by  mother  tincture  belladonna. 

Get  the  green  root  or  mother  tincture  at  any  homeopathic  pharmacy, 
and  if  the  dog  has  had  but  one  spasm,  ten  to  fifteen  drops  poured  down 
his  throat  will  antidote  the  poison;  if  not,  repeat  every  fifteen  minutes. 
When  the  dog  has  had  the  poison  down'  long  enough  to  cause  paralysis, 
and  is  unable  to  swallow,  a  syringe  can  be  used  per  rectum — -twenty  to 
thirty  drops;  and  seldom  does  one  have  to  use  but  two  doses,  either  by 
mouth  or  rectum. 

I  have  saved  dogs  when  given  up  by  veterinary  surgeons,  and  I  believe 
any  dog  can  be  saved  so  long  as  there  is  circulation  enough  to  take  up  the 
antidote.       (See   also    Poisoning.) 

Breaking  Dog  to  Collar  and  Chain. — The  sooner  a  young  dog  is  taught 
to  go  in  a  collar  and  lead  the  better.  It  is  best  to  begin  when  the  puppy 
is  three  or  four  months  old,  first  by  letting  it  wear  a  collar  for  a  week 
or  two,  then  tie  a  piece  of  thick  string  to  the  collar,  and  let  it  go  about 
with  this  for  a  few  days.  At  the  end  of  this  period  substitute  the  string 
for  a  chain,  catching  hold  of  the  chain  with  one  hand  every  now  and  then, 
and  giving  it  a  dainty  bit  with  the  other.  In  this  way  it  will  get  quite 
accustomed  to  what  the  dog,  no  doubt,  thinks  a  strange  method  of  depriving 
it  of  its  sweet  liberty.  Don't  drag  the  dog  along  and  expect  it  to  become 
accustomed  to  the  feel  of  the  collar  by  giving  it  a  sore  and  stiff  neck.  That 
is  the  way  to  make  it  hate  a  collar. 

Crusty  Ears. — "A  dog,  four  years  old,  whose  ears  are  affected  with 
some  sort  of  skin  disease.  The  backs  of  his  ears  seem  dry  and  scurfy, 
the  hair  falls  out  and  the  dog  is  continually  scratching  them.  There  is 
no  swelling,  no  sores,  no  bleeding;  the  skin  seems  simply  drying,  but 
perfectly  healthy  otherwise.      Please  prescribe." 

Answer. — Apply  resinol  ointment  once  daily  after  washing  the  ear. 
Eberhart's  Skin  Remedy  will  cure  this.  Apply  twice  daily.  After  putting 
a  little  of  it  on  the  ear,  rub  and  work  it  well  with  thumb  and  finger  till 
the  scurvy  matter  softens  and  you  remove  it  from  the  ear  by  rubbing. 
Continue  daily  treatment  till  cured — a  matter  of  a  week  or  so  as  a  rule. 

Carbolized  Vaseline  (How  to  Make). — Carbolized  vaseline  is  an  oint- 
ment often  recommended  by  the  veterinary  profession,  and  is  often  inquired 
for  by  dog  fanciers.  A  good  plan  for  making  it  is  as  follows:  Take  six 
ounces  of  solid  paraphine  wax,  melt  it  thoroughly  in  a  saucepan,  and  when 
.melted  add  twelve  ounces  of  vaseline  and  remelt.  Then  as  it  cools  add 
about  one  dram  of  pure  carbolic  acid,  and  stir  thoroughly  until  cold. 

This  is  the  official,  or  British  Pharmacopaeia,  formula.  It  involves  very 
little  trouble,  and  makes  the  most  elegant  and  serviceable  preparation.  A 
very  fair  ointment  can  be  made  by  simply  rubbing  pure  carbolic  acid  into 


208  MISCELLANEOUS 

petroleum  jelly,  say  three  or  four  drops  to  each  ounce,  but  it  is  very  soft, 
especially  in  hot  weather,  and  does  not  keep  nearly  so  well  as  the  first. 

Terrier  Continually  Scratching. — Terrier  is  repeatedly  scratching  him- 
self. He  has  no  fleas  or  anything  about  his  body,  is  very  often  washed,  so 
cannot  be  dirty.  It  is  very  annoying.  He  will  roll  over  on  his  back,  and 
then  try  and  scratch  himself  anywhere  and  everywhere  about  his  body. 
What  shall  I  do  with  him? 

Answer. — Give  the  dog  every  week  during  the  hot  weather  a  bath  in 
Standard  Disinfectant,  diluted  with  fifty  parts  of  water. 

Muzzles. The  season  for  muzzles,  just  when  the  dog  requires  a  free 

mouth  more  than  ever,  will  come  around.  No  comfortable  muzzle  has  yet 
been  invented — nor  is  it  likely  to  be,  since  every  self-respecting  dog  has 
personal  objections  to  being  constantly  faced  by  a  cage  arrangement,  and 
will  show  his  distaste  by  rubbing  on  the  ground  and  pawing,  with  the  result 
that  he  very  soon  will  make  raw  and  sore  places.  The  buckle  of  the  strap 
used  to  fasten  the  muzzle  needs  to  be  carefully  arranged  and  padded  to 
prevent  this.  Even  though  this  and  every  other  care  be  taken,  in  many  cases 
the  trouble  results,  and  every  owner  of  good  dogs  knows  how  difficult  it  is 
when  once  the  hair  has  been  destroyed  to  bring  up  appearances  again  to 
their  original  excellence. 

Tonic  Pill  for  Dog  After  a  Show. — Here  is  a  good  recipe  for  dogs  when 
returning  from  a  show  or  after  any  specially  hard  work.  It  makes  an 
excellent  pill  for  appetite,  and  being  a  mild  laxative,  is  just  what  a  dog 
ought  to  have  when  he  comes  home.     Take  of: 

Compound  powder  of  colocynth 24  grains 

Sulphate-  of  iron    12   grains 

Sulphate  of  quinine 12   grains 

Powdered    liquorice   root    48   grains 

Extract  of  gentian,  sufficient  to  make  into  a  suitable  mass.  Divide  into  16 
pills  (or  32  of  half  size  if  desired),  Give  one  of  the  larger  size  to  a 
dog  of  not  more  than  20  lbs.  every  four  or  five  hours  until  a  distinctly 
aperient  effect  is  produced.  The  smaller  pills  will  answer  for  smaller  dogs, 
and  large  dogs  can  have  two  or  three  of  the  pills,  according  to  circumstances. 
These  pills  are  best  prepared  fresh  as  required.  I  prefer,  however,  to  use 
Sergeant's,  Clayton's  or  Dent's  Condition  Pills  much  handier.  Gelatin  or 
sugar  coated,  and  easier  to  give. 

Chronic  Cough. — "Pointed  dog  whose  coat  was  good,  healthy  in  every 
way,  bowels  regular,  has  acted  dull  for  two  weeks,  wanting  to  lie  down  a 
good  bit  of  the  time.  Taken  for  a  run  after  a  wheel  unless  I  rode  slowly, 
will  begin  to  cough  after  a  couple  miles,  and  unless  given  a  rest  would 
cough  as  if  he  would  strangle  to  death.  It  is  a  dry  cough,  and  I  have  never 
seen  Mm  emit  anything.  He  seldom  coughs  when  at  home.  I  treated  for 
worms  and  got  none,  gave  cough  medicine  and  it  done  no  good." 

Answer. — It  is  a  chronic  cough  and  hard  to  cure.  Get  the  "Cough 
Pill"  prescription  filled  as  given  in  this  book,  and  give  a  pill  night  and 
morning,  keeping  them  up  regularly  for  some  weeks.     (See  Cough.) 

Weak  Joints. — "Basset-hound  pup,  eleven  months  old,  very  weak  in 
joints  below  pastern,  which  makes  him  weak  as  if  he  had  tender  fore  feet. 
He  does  not  knuckle  over.  I  have  commenced  giving  him  Parrish's  Chemi- 
cal Food.     Can  I  do  better?     He  has  no  worms."  % 

Answer. — Continue  the  Parrish's  food,  and  bathe  the  legs  twice  daily 
with  a  solution  of  Tidman's  sea  salt.     Feed  principally  on  raw  meat. 

Cold  and  Debility. — "Prescribe  for  my  English  setter.  She  had  a 
litter  of  five  puppies,  then  one  eye  got  sore  and  a  film  came  over  it;  she 
lost  her  appetite  and  her  milk  dried  up  in  two  weeks.  I  have  been  feeding 
the  puppies  on  cow's  milk  ever  since.  She  eats  barely  enough  to  keep  her 
alive.  She  does  not  run  at  the  nose  or  the  other  eye,  or  cough.  What  is 
th«  matter  with  her? 


MISCELLANEOUS  109 

Answar. — Cold  and  debility.  Give  her  a  tablespoonful  of  the  emulsion 
of  Cod  Liver  Oil  three  times  a  day,  feed  raw,  lean  beel,  chopped  fine,  milk 
and  eggs,  gelatin  or  anything  she  will  eat,  and  give  five  grains  of  pepsin 
after  meals.     Use  my  eye  lotion  No.  2  twice  a  day." 

Fits. — "My  setter,  three  years  old,  is  subject  to  fits.  Will  hunt  fast 
for  three  or  four  hours,  then  get  so  weak  he  staggers  and  finally  lies  down, 
unable  to  get  up  and  limber  as  a  rag;  the  spell  will  last  an  hour.  Previous 
to  these  spells  he  is  going  fast  and  seems  strong.  Never  whines  or  makes 
any  noise  while  he  has  a  fit.     Is  in  good  condition." 

Answer. — "Give  2  grains  of  iodide  of  potash  three  times  daily  for  two 
weeks,  together  with  one-sixtieth  of  a  grain  of  strychnine."     See  also  Fits.) 

Bloody  Mucus. — "Please  prescribe  for  my  setter  dog,  three  years  old, 
whose  bowels  are  loose,  and  he  is  constantly  straining  and  passing  a  bloody 
mucus  which  is  becoming  quite  offensive;  his  appetite  is  fairly  good;  hair 
in  tolerable  condition;  he  is  lively  enough  and  hunts  quite  fast  and  keeps 
going.     I  notice  he  is  losing  flesh.     Is  his  condition  serious?" 

Answer. — "Yes,  it  is  serious.  Give  one  ounce  of  castor-oil,  and  three 
times  daily  give  one  teaspoon ful  of  the  following  mixture:  Fluid  extract' 
gentian  root  one  dram,  fluid  extract  hydrastis  one  dram,  tincture  of  ginger 
one-half  dram;  water  to  make  two  ounces." 

Bitch  With  Pups  Won't  Eat. — "English  setter  bitch,  weight  thirty-eight 
pounds,  who  has  a  litter  of  ten  puppies,  four  weeks  old.  She  does  not  eat 
as  she  should;  every  few  days  she  will  refuse  food  and  vomit  freely,  and 
the  only  thing  I  can  get  her  to  eat  is  bread  and  milk.  Her  bowels  are  very 
loose.  Puppies  are  in  good  condition.  I  have  been  giving  them  bread  and 
milk  also." 

Answer. — "Wean  the  puppies  as  soon  as  possible,  feed  the  dam  lean  raw 
beef,  chopped  fine,  if  she  will  eat  it.  Give  her  three  grains  of  pepsin  after 
each  meal,  also  give  a  tablespoonful  of  cod  liver  oil  emulsion  four  times  a 
day." 

Urinating  Too  Often. — "My  pointer  bitch,  three  years  old,  that  has  just 
had  a  litter  of  puppies,  which  I  destroyed  as  soon  as  they  were  born.  She 
tries  to  make  water  too  often,  at  least  twenty-five  times  in  an  hour.  I  had 
her  out  on  Monday,  September  5,  and  she  tried  to  make  water  during  the 
day  at  least  five  hundred  times.     What  is  the  matter?     Please  prescribe." 

Answer. — "Give  your  bitch  a  teaspoonful  of  sanmetto  three  times  a  day 
for  at  least  two  weeks,  and  if  necessary  longer;  she  is  suffering  from  in- 
flammatory action  of  the  uniary  organs." 

Sore  Throat  Cough  Due  to  Cold. — "I  have  a  hound  with  a  peculiar  af- 
fection of  the  throat.  He  has  a  hoarseness  of  the  voice,  with  a  slight 
watery  discharge  from  the  eyes,  also  a  saliva  from  the  corners  of  the  mouth. 
Thinking  he  had  a  cold  I  gave  him  a  Cough  Cure,  but  it  did  not  touch  him. 
Although  his  eyes  and  mouth  are  now  free  from  discharge  his  voice  is  very 
hoarse,  acting  a  great  deal  like  a  man  with  a  sore  throat,  requiring  an  effort 
to  speak.  Do  you  think  there  is  a  bone  splinter  in  the  throat  or  is  it  from 
a  cold?     Please  prescribe." 

Answer. — "We  think  it  is  a  cold,  use  the  following  mixture:  Muriate 
ammonia  six  drams,  fluid  extract  belladonna  three  drams,  fluid  extract  licorice 
four  ounces,  simple  syrup  four  ounces;  give  a  teaspoonful  every  five  hours." 

Lumps  and  Sores  on  Dog. — "I  have  a  pointer  pappy  about  seven  months 
old,  and  when  he  was  three  months  old  a  lump  formed  on  the  top  of  his 
head;  I  had  him  treated  by  a  veterinary  who  blistered  it  and  opened  it, 
removing  some  pus.  The  head  soon  got  well,  but  a  month  or  so  later  he 
took  the  distemper,  which  soon  yielded  to  treatment,  and  he  was  growing 
and  looking  finely,  but  recently  a  large  lump  formed  on  his  left  side  and 
three  days  later  a  larger  one  on  the  left  side  of  his  neck.  I  used  blisters 
on  both  and  they  are  now  discharging  pus.  The  puppy  has  always  been  fed 
liberally  on  well  cooked  meat,  with  plenty  of  bread  and  milk,  and  kept  in 
the  best  of  kenaels.  Please  prescribe.  I  have  two  more  of  the  same  litter 
that  went  through  the  distemper  all  right  and  show  no  signs  of  any  other 
disorder." 

Answer.-^"Wash  out  the  sores  that  are  discharging  pus  once  a  day  for 


210  ,  MISCELLANEOUS 

one  week  with  equal  parts  of  peroxide  of  hydrogen  and  water,  and  give,  twice 
a  day,  Sergeant's  Condition  Pills." 

Lameness  From  Hard  Bunch  on  Leg. — "Please  prescribe  for  my  Eng- 
lish setter  dog,  six  years  old.  He  has  had  a  hard  bunch  in  the  middle 
joint  of  his  right  hindleg  for  some  time;  he  always  chews  at  it  as  if  it 
itched,  and  it  is  making  him  lame;  he  had  the  same,  on  each  of  his  two  fore- 
legs, but  they  went  away  at  length  without  treatment." 

Answer. — Give  ten  grains  of  the  idodide  of  potash  three  times  a  day 
for  two  weeks,  followed  by  a  Sergeant's  Condition  Pill  twice  a  day  for 
probably  a  month.  Paint  the  enlargement  with  tincture  of  iodine  once 
daily  for  a  week. 

Constant  and  Frequent  Urinating. — "An  English  setter  bitch,  who  eats 
well,  has  a  good  coat,  is  full  of  life  and  seems  to  be  in  perfect  health,  yet 
when  she  is  lying  in  one  place  or  sleeping  there  is  a  constant  but  slow 
discharge  of  urine,  and  when  she  gets  up  her  whole  side  will  be  wet.  I 
notice  also  a  matter-like  secretion.  I  have  noticed  these  discharges  the 
past  week  and  cannot  understand  whether  it  is  a  weakness  of  the  kidneys 
or  a  disease.     What  is  the  trouble?     Please  prescribe." 

Answer. — "Give  one  dram  of  sanmetto  three  times  a  day  for  a  couple  of 
weeks." 

Bloodshot  Eyes. — "My  English  setter  bitch,  three  years  old,  had  dis- 
temper badly  at  one  year.  Since  then  her  eyes  and  the  lining  of  eyelids 
have  been  red,  at  times  worse  than  others;  there  seems  to  be  no  inflam- 
mation, only  the  white  of  the  eyes  and  lids  are  bloodshot,  particularly  so 
after  a  hard  hunt  or  when  she  is  a  bit  off;  they  very  rarely  discharge. 
Please  prescribe." 

Answer. — "Drop  in  the  eyes  three  times  a  day  Eberhart's  Eye  Lotion 
No.  2." 

Dandruff  and  Hair  Coming  Out. — "Please  prescribe  for  cocker  spaniel, 
six  months  old,  that  has  dry  dandruff  all  over  him,  hot,  dry  nose  and 
scratches  continually.  Have  used  mange  cure  a  number  of  times  and 
washed  with  dog  soap,  but  these  have  done  little  good.  The  hair  is  coming 
out  where  the  dandruff  is  worse." 

Answer. — "Take  boraic  acid  one  ounce,  saliclyic  acid  one  ounce,  glycer- 
ine one  pint;  rub  this  well  into  the  skin  twice  a  day  and  wash  every  third 
day  with  Eberhart's  Dog  Soap;  continue  this  treatment  for  thirty  clays. 
Internally  give  five  grains  of  the  hyposulphite  of  soda  and  three  grains  of 
pepsin  three  times  a  day.  In  lieu  of  prescription  given  for  external  treat- 
ment better  use  Eberhart's  Skin  Cure,  preceded  by  bath  with  his  dog  soap." 

Swelling  on  Legs  Above  the  Hock  and  Discharge. — "My  pointer,  eight 
and  one-half  months  old,  that  has  distemper  and  with  it  came  a  large  swell- 
ing right  above  the  hock  on  both  hind-legs,  and  one  on  the  righ  shoulder 
along  the  neck;  all  three  of  these  opened  with  a  discharge  which  has 
caused  a  soreness  all  over  the  neck  and  at  the  right  ear;  all  of  the  hair 
is  coming  out,  and  there  is  still  a  little  discharge.  The  two  lumps  on  the 
hind-legs  opened  on  November  15;  the  one  on  the  shoulder  opened-  on  No- 
vember 19.  The  fever  is  broken  and  the  puppy  eats  well.  The  openings 
on  the  legs  are  closing  up  but  are  a  little  thick  yet  and  are  very  white. 
The  neck  where  the  pus  has  been  discharged  upon  it  is  very  red,  on  thfl 
order  of  a  scalded  spot,  and  the  hair  is  all  off." 

Answer. — "Give  three  grains  of  the  iodide  of  potash  three  times  a  day 
for  two  weeks,  wash  out  the  sores  with  equal  parts  of  the  peroxide  of 
hydrogen  and  water  for  two  or  three  days,  then  stop  the  washing;  then  put 
the  dog  on  a  thirty  days'  treatment  of  Sergeant's  or  Clayton's  Condition 
Pills,  one  pill  night  and  morning." 

Lameness  in  Stifle  Joint. — "My  pointer  dog,  eighteen  months  old,  be- 
came lame  in  his  right  fore-leg  about  seven  or  eight  months  ago,  and  I  am 
unable  to  ascertain  where  the  lameness  is.  I  can  find  nothing  in  the  foot 
or  any  indication  of  soreness  in  the  leg  or  shoulder;  where  he  steps  on  that 
foot  he  places  it  out  beyond  a  natural  position,  and  walks  with  his  leg 
projected.  He  is  in  good  health;  had  the  distemper  when  four  months 
old.     What  is  the  ailment?     Please  prescribe." 


MISCELLANEOUS  211 

Answer. — "The  lameness  is  located  in  the  stifle  joint.  Add  one  ounce 
of  the  tincture  of  arnica  to  a  pint  of  witch  hazel,  and  apply  two  or  three 
times  a  day  with  gentle  friction  and  hand  rubbing,  fifteen  minutes  at  a 
time." 

Mumps  or  Parotitis.- — "I  have  a  dog  that  has  a  swelling  on  each  side  of 
his  head,  below  ears,  that  comes  on  suddenly.  The  dog  is  very  droopy,  and 
carries  his  head  stiff,  and  does  not  eat  very  much.  What  can  be  done  for 
him?" 

Answer. — "From  the  symptoms  shown  above  your  dog  has  parotitis 
or  mumps,  which  is  an  affection  of  the  parotid  glands,  and  in  this  case  both 
of  the  glands  are  affected.  When  the  disease  first  makes  its  appearance 
warm  applications  to  the  swellings  are  indicated,  in  the  form  of  warm 
water  or  poultices,  and  on  account  of  the  difficulty  in  keeping  poultices 
on  from  the  dog  shaking  head,  etc.,  stimulating  liniments  might  be  used, 
such  as  soap  liniment,  which  should  be  applied  twice  daily,  or  use  yellow' 
oxide  of  mercury  ointment,  well  rubbed  into  the  skin  over  the  enlargement. 
Should  the  swelling  show  no  tendency  to  become  smaller  in  a  few  days  it 
would  indicate  the  formation  of  an  abscess  in  the  gland,  which  should  be 
carefully  opened  and  treated  with  some  antiseptic  injection,  as  creolin  3 
per  cent  in  water.  The  appetite  will  return  after-  the  swelling  and  acute 
stage  of  the  disease  has  passed  off." 

Dog  Slobbering. — "I  would  like  to  ask  the  cause  of  a  dog's  slobbering. 
He  has  no  appetite." 

Answer. — "Examine  the  mouth  for  foreign  bodies  and  the  teeth  par- 
ticularly for  decay.  If  either  condition  exists  prompt  attention  is  indicated. 
Wash  out  the  mouth  with  the  following  solution:  Permanganate  of  potasb 
one  part;  alum  three  parts,  chlorate  of  potash  five  parts,  water  one  hun- 
dred parts.     Use  freely  four  or  five  times  a  day." 

Rheumatic  Condition. — "My  pointer,  three  weeks  old,  and  naturally  fat, 
since  she  has  had  a  litter  of  puppies,  has  been  lame  in  one  hind-leg,  favoring 
it  as  she  travels.  The  leg  seems  thinner  than  the  opposite  one  and  re- 
cently she  travels  on  said  leg  and  favors  one  of  the  front  legs,  running  on 
three.  I  think  it  must  be  internal  as  she  has  not  been  hurt.  I  have  tried 
liniment   but   to   no   avail." 

Answer. — "She  is  rheumatic.  Give  her  a  teaspoonful  of  Fellows'  Syrup 
of  Hypophosphites  three  times  a  day  for  six  weeks,  give  five  grains  of  salol 
twice  a  clay  for  two  weeks,  feed  her  anything  she  will  eat,  do  not  over- 
exercise  or  expose  to  cold  or  dampness,  and  hand  rub  the  limb  twenty  min- 
utes at  a  time  three  times  a  day." 

Sore  Feet  in  Hunting  Dogs. — During  hunting  season,  when  dogs  are 
run  on  rough  hard  ground,  the  feet  may  become  sore,  sometimes  in  the 
pads,  sometimes  between  the  toes,  or  both.  A  solution  of  sulphate  of  cop- 
per, one  dram  to  an  ounce  of  water,  is  good  for  the  sores  between  the  toes, 
and  a  strong  solution  of  white  oak  bark  is  another  remedy,  especially  for 
the  sore  pads. 

Sucking  Eggs,  To  Break  Dogs  of. — Make  a  small  hole  in  each  end  of 
an  egg  and  blow  out  the  contents.  Then  fill  the  shell  with  a  mixture  of 
strong  mustard  and  red  pepper,  paste  pieces  of  white  paper  over  the  holes 
and  allow  the  dog  to  find  and  eat  the  egg.  Very  few  experiences  with  such 
eggs  will  be  needed  to  cure  his  propensity. 

Debility  and  Weakness  After  Distemper. — "Have  cured  my  eight- 
months-old  setter  bitch  of  the  distemper,  but  since  she  has  been  cured  she 
can  hardly  stand.  Her  eyes,  nose  and  mouth  seem  to  be  in  good  condition, 
yet  she  eats  and  drinks  little.  When  sleeping  she  whines  and  shakes  her- 
self unceasingly;  her  bowels  act  the  same  as  if  she  had  the  diarrhea,  and 
she  has  acted  this  way  for  six  or  eight  weeks.  The  warts  have  disappeared. 
Please  prescribe." 

Answer. — "Feed  anything  she  will  eat — beef  broths,  chopped  lean  beef, 
gelatin  and  eggs,  etc. — and  give  her  a  Sergeant's,  Clayton's  or  Eberhart's 
Condition   Pill  twice  a  day  for  probably  a  month." 

No  Name  for  This  Disease. — "My  pointer  dog  is  ten  years  old,  hunts 
and  covers  the  ground  in  good  style,  will  take  a  six-rail  fence  with  ease,  will 


212  |        |      \         |      I     '  MISCELLANEOUS 

hunt  all  day,  and  cry  to  proceed  when  I  sit  down  to  lunch  or  to  rest;  he 
does  not  suffer  any  pain  afield,  only  he  swells  about  the  loins  the  next 
morning  and  is  sore  to  the  touch  on  the  sides  of  the  small  of  his  back. 
He  is  continually  trying  to  pass  his  Water  when  afield,  but  only  a  few  drops 
of  blood  will  pass,  and  in  these  attempts  his  back  parts  quiver  a  great  deal. 
Please  name  the  disease  and  prescribe  a  cure." 

Answer. — "Give  a  teaspoonful  of  sanmetto  three  times  a  day.  There 
is  no  particular  name  for  this  trouble  in  dogs.  Also  give  him  for  some 
time  one  of  the  Condition  Pills  mentioned  above." 

Epilepsy. — "Prescribe  for  my  three-year-old  sixty-pound  foxhound,  that, 
at  times,  while  on  chase,  will  suddenly  fall,  his  legs  become  stiff  and  he 
will  whine  as  though  in  great  pain  and  tremble  all  over.  The  attacks  do 
not  last  long,  however,  and  he  is  all  right  again,  or  seems  to  be.  Nothing 
else   (so  far  as  I  can  see)   appears  to  trouble  him..    What  is  the  matter?" 

Answer.— "A  mild  form  of  epilepsy.  Give  him  a  capsule  three  times 
a  day  containing  pepsin  three  grains,  gentian  two  grains,  nux  vomica  one- 
half  grain." 

Drying  Up  Bag  on  Bitch. — "I  have  a  pointer  bitch,  two  and  a  half  years 
old,  which  has  already  had  puppies.  She  came  in  season  again  about  the 
middle  of  January  and  I  had  her  bred;  she  has  not  had  any  puppies,  but  her 
teats  came  down  a  little  and  she  has  a  little  milk  in  them.  Should  I  rub 
them  with  anything  to  dry  them  up?     If  so,  please  prescribe." 

Answer. — "Apply  the  following,  with  gentle  friction,  twice  a  flay: 
Lanolin  one  ounce,  camphor  twenty  grains,  belladonna  twenty  grains." 

Tendency  to  Rickets  in  Puppies. — "My  English  setter  puppies,  two 
months  old,  tremble  when  they  stand  up  and  suddenly  will  fall,  then  when 
they  get  up  act  as  if  sore  on  their  fore-legs;  at  times  they  seem  better. 
I  feed  them  milk  and  soft  food  such  as  bread  and  gravy  mixed.  What  is 
the  matter?      Please  prescribe." 

Answer. — "A  tendency  to  rickets.  Feed  raw,  lean  beef,  chopped  fine, 
raw  eggs,  gelatin,  meat  broths,  stale  bread,  etc.,  and  give  each  puppy  one- 
half  teaspoonful  of  cod  liver  oil  emulsion  four  times  a  day." 

Running  Sore  on  Leg. — "On  the  fleshy  part  of  my  pointer's  hind-leg 
is  a  running  sore,  in  size  about  two  inches  by  one  inch,  and  at  the  top  of 
the  sore  is  a  light-colored  fluid.     Please  prescribe." 

Answer. — "Inject  equal  parts  of  peroxide  of  hydrogen  and  water  three 
times  a  day  for  three  days;  then  discontinue  and  sponge  the  sore  three 
times  a  day  with  a  solution  of  sulphate  of  copper,  one  dram,  water  one 
ounce." 

Kennel  Sores  or  Callous  Growths. — Dogs  are  sometimes  afflicted  with 
kennel  sores  on  hips  and  hocks,  elbows,  etc.  They  should  be  attended 
to  at  once.  Boracic  acid  ointment  should  be  applied.  Callous  growths  on 
elbows  and  joints  must  be  kept  softened  with  vaseline  or  whale  oil. 

Fungus  Growths  on  Mouth  or  Tongue. — "My  cocker  spaniel  has  been 
troubled  lately  with  canker  in  the  mouth  and  on  the  tongue.  This  comes 
in  spots,  which  enlarge  until  the  several  spots  join  together;  it  looks  like 
a  fungus  growth,  not  a  sore,  but  on  the  mushroom  order.     Please  prescribe." 

Answer. — "Touch  the  spots  once  daily,  for  four  days,  with  lunar  caustic; 
care  being  taken  not  to  allow  any  to  run  on  his  tongue,  and  only  one  to  be 
treated  at  a  time." 

Fever  Mixture.— Every  kennel  man  should  keep  a  good  fever  mixture 
on  his  kennel  shelf.  A  chill  or  cold  is  indicated  by  hot,  dry  nose,  shivering 
and  lassitude,  dull  eyes,  with  more  or  less  discharge  from  nose  and  eyes. 
If  attended  to  at  once  serious  complications  may  often  be  avoided.  Dogs 
going  to  and  from  shows  are  subjected  to  many  extreme  changes  of  temper- 
ature during  express  transportation,  and  a  quinine  pill  will  usually  ward  off 
any  ill  effects.  If,  however,  the  symptoms  described  develop,  the  following 
fever  mixture  should  be  given:  Powdered  nitre  one  dram,  sweet  spirits  of 
nitre  one-half  ounce,  Mindereruos'  spirits  one-half  ounce,  wine  of  antimony 
one  dram,  water  four  ounces.  Terriers  and  dogs  over  15  pounds  up  to" 
pointers  and  setters  should  be  given  a  tablespoonful  m  a  mtlf  gruel  every 
four  hours. 


MISCELLANEOUS  I  '  21  % 

Bone  Swallowed.— If  a  dog  has  swallowed  a  small  bone,  a  chicken 
splinter,  for  instance  ,and  shows  signs  of  trouble,  it  is  a  good  plan  to  give  a 
bolus  of  mashed  potato  or  soft  crumb  bread.  This  will  generally  aid  the 
passage  of  the  bone. 

*Age  to  Spay  Bitches. — "At  what  age  is  it  best  to  spay  a  bitch?  Can 
a  person  perform  the  operation  himself?  If  so,  shall  be  thankful  for  the 
information  on  how  to  proceed?" 

Answer. — "The  operation  of  spaying  a  bitch  is  usually  undertaken  at 
the  age  of  four  to  six  months.  I  do  not  advise  such  an  interference  with 
Nature,  however.  Upon  maturity  the  spayed  bitch  or  castrated  dog  becomes 
unduly  fat  and  lazy,  and  lacks  enthusiasm,  ambition  and  sagacity.  Most 
assuredly  such  an  operation  must  be  attended  to  by  a  competent  veterinrian. 
Clipping  Overgrown  Toe  Nails. — Toy  dogs  that  have  little  or  no  exercise 
out  of  doors  and  do  not  get  a  chance  to  get  their  nails  wore  down  by  con- 
tact with  the  street  are  often  troubled  with  this,  and  neglected  cases  where 
the  nails  curl  around  and  grow  into  the  flesh  are  very  painful,  fester, 
causing  soreness  and  lameness.  Cut  off  the  ends  of  the  nails  with  a  pair 
of  sharp  nippers,  that  you  can  buy  at  any  hardware  store — but  not  too 
close.  Do  this  same  as  you  do  your  finger  nails,  but  with  your  dog  do  it 
about  every  two  weeks,  avoiding  cutting  into  the  quick  part,  you  can  easily 
do  this  right. by  being  careful. 

Dogs  Killing  Chickens. — Should  your  dog  acquire  this  very  bad  habit 
you  can  break  him  of  it,  which  you  should  do  at  once,  as  he  has  no  right  to 
do  this,  and  perhaps  cause  trouble  with  you  and  your  neighbors.  Catch 
him  in  the  act,  give  him  a  good  whipping  and  then  take  the  chicken  he 
has  killed  and  fasten  it  securely  around  his  neck  so  he  can't  scratch  it  off, 
and  make  him  wear  this  chicken  for  a  necklace  for  a  week,  or  until  the 
chicken  has  become  so  decayed  that  the  odor  will  cause  him  such  an  intense 
dislike  for  fowl  that  anything  else  would  smell  more  sweet.  This  is  an 
infallible  cure  if  you  can  fasten  chicken  on  so  securely  that  he  can't 
get  rid  of  it. 

Rheumatism. — Terrier  dog,  about  four  years,  has  gradually  developed 
great  weakness  in  the  hind-quarters.  He  shakes  when  he  is  standing  and 
can  only  just  manage  to  get  on  to  a  low  chair,  dragging  the  back  legs  up 
behind  him.  His  appetite  is  good  and  he  is  in  good  condition,  and  his 
bowels  are  all  right.  He  can  run  quite  well,  but  walks  rather  stiffly.  He 
sleeps  a  good  deal.     Rather  small,  weight  about  20  lbs. 

Answer. — In  all  probability  this  weakness  is  due  to  rheumatism,  and 
I  advise  you  to  first  give  some  medicine  for  this,  say,  a  five  grain  tabloid 
of  aspirin  three  times  a  day  after  food.  This  may  be  continued  for  four 
or  five  days  or  even  a  week,  then  afterwards  give  a  nerve  stimulant  if  the 
dog  is  still  weak  in  the  legs,  as  two  drops  of  tincture  of  nux  vomica  in  a 
dessertspoonful  of  water  three  times  a  day  after  food.  Keep  the  bowels 
open,  and  avoid  meat  for  a  time.     See  Rheumatism). 

Sore  Feet  in  Hunting  Dogs. — Dogs  that  travel  much  on  hard,  dry  roads, 
as  Dalmatians  often  do,  and  sporting  dogs  hunting  over  rough  ground,  short 
stubble,  or  stumpy  heather,  are  apt  to  get  the  spongy,  elastic  pads  of  the 
feet  contused  and  worn  thin.  The  treatment  depends  on  the  extent  of 
the   injury. 

If  the  case  is  severe,  first  apply  a  poultice  of  half  bran  and  half  boiled 
turnips.  Sometimes  the  inflammation  is  great,  and  the  feet  become  swol- 
len, hot,  and  painful,  so  that  the  dog  cannot  stand,  and  the  general  health 
suffers.  Feverishness  and  loss  of  appetite  reduce  his  strength,  matter  forms 
in  the  feet,  or  the  soles  slough  off.  In  such  cases  linseed  meal  should  be 
added  to  the  other  ingredients  of  the  poultice,  and  a  little  olive  oil  poured 
over  its  surface.  The  dog  should  have  a  mild  aperient,  a  dose  of  fever 
mixture  three  or  four  times  a  day,  and  be  kept  on  a  light  diet.  It  may  be 
necessary,  for  the  more  speedy  relief  of  the  dog,  to  let  the  matter  out  with 
the  lanset,  and  in  all  respects  these  cases  should  be  treated  as  ulcers.  Dogs 
long  confined  should  not  be  at  once  run  much  on  hard  roads  or  worked 
on  rough  ground,  but  their  feet  gradually  hardened  by  daily  increased 
exercise. 


214  MISCELLANEOUS 

Hints  on  Docking.— This  operation  should  be  performed  when  the  puppy 
is  from  3  to  5  days  old,  if  healthy  and  strong.  Weaklings  it  is  advisable 
not  to  dock  before  10  days  old.  A  pair  of  sharp  scissors  will  be  needed. 
Before  severing  the  tail  the  skin  should  be  well  drawn  back  towards  the 
body,  so  that  after  the  tail  is  cut,  the  skin  overlaps  the  severed  bone.  The 
bleeding  as  a  rule  stops  very  soon.  In  case  it  does  not  stop,  some  Frair's 
Balsam  should  be  applied  at  once. 

The  following  lengths  are  advisable.  Spaniels,  Irish  Terriers  and 
Airedales  have  rather  more  than  half  the  tail  removed.  Fox  Terriers, 
about  two-fifths.  Griffons,  about  a  third  of  the  tail  is  left.  Schipperkes  are 
docked  quite  close  to  the  rump,  or  a  joint  nearer  the  back,  but  it  is  advis- 
able that  this  operation  should  be  done  by  a  veterinarian. 

Alum  Water,  to  Make. — One  ounce  pulverized  alum  to  a  quart  of  water. 
Lump  on  Neck. — Litter  of  bull  pups  2  months  old;   one  of  them  has  a 
large  lump,,  about  as  big  as  a  large  walnut,  under  the  under  jaw. 

Answer. — The  swelling  is  probably  an  enlarged  gland;  cut  the  hair  off 
over  the  swelling  to  the  extent  of  a  quarter,  and  paint  with  tincture  of  iodine 
twice  a  week. 

Bones,  Use  and  Abuse  of. — If  administered  in  an  intelligent  spirit,  bones 
are  not  only  much  appreciated,  but  extremely  beneficial  to  dogs.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  wrong  sort  of  bones  are  liable  to  cause  them  much  trouble. 
A  large  bone,  with  not  too  much  meat  upon  it,  if  given  to  a  dog  to  gnaw, 
will  keep  him  amused  for  hours,  and  it  will  also  assist  in  keeping  his  teeth 
in  order  and  benefit  his  digestion,  as  the  gnawing  will  increase  the  secre- 
tion of  saliva.  A  small,  hard  bone,  such  as  that  of  a  rabbit,  or  chicken,  or 
lamb  chop,  may,  if  swallowed,  cause  severe  inflammation  of  the  intestines, 
or  a  sharp  point  of  the  bone  may  wound  the  dog's  inside  and  so  cost  him 
his  life.  Of  course,  the  danger  of  either  of  these  occurrences  is  more  or  less 
remote,  but  it  exists  all- the  same,  and  therefore  the  wise  dog  owner  will 
run  no  risk. 

The  feet  of  chicken  bones  are  safe,  so  is  the  neck,  and  are  a  dainty 
bite   for   the   dog. 

Anthritis  (or  inflammation  of  a  joint). — The  joint  usually  is  swollen 
nad  very  painful  and  the  victim  is  lame  and  unable  to  place  the  foot  to  the 
ground.  During  acute  inflammation  rest  is  necessary  and  applications  of 
either  cold  or  hot  water  will  give  relief,  or  the  two  may  be  alternated.  The 
following  lotion  should  be  used:  Laudanum  two  drams,  Goulard's  extract 
of  lead  one  dram,  water  to  make  six  ounces.  Saturate  a  piece  of  lint 
large  enough  to  go  around  the  joint  with' this  lotion  and  cover  with  a  piece 
•of  silk  and  bandage  in  position.  This  dressing  should  be  changed  three 
times  a  day.     Keep  the  bowels  open. 

Calculi  (Stones  in  the  Kidney). — This  is  a  very  dangerous  disorder 
and  fortunately  not  of  common  occurrence.  The  principal  symptom  that 
will  likely  first  attract  the  owner's  attention  is  the  passage  of  blood  with 
the  urine.  In  severe  cases  this  will  be  accompanied  with  pus.  The  dog,  at 
times,  seems  very  ill  and  the  temperature  will  run  up  to  103  or  104  and 
then  subside.  There  is  a  rapid  loss  of  condition  and  a  general  decline; 
pressure  over  the  loins  is  very  painful.  It  should  be  remembered,  however, 
before  diagnosing  a  case  on  this  latter  symptom  alone  that  all  dogs  will 
flinch  if  the  hand  is  passed  over  the  back  and  loins  even  lightly.  Death 
from  calculi  is  the  result  of  uremic  poisoning.  The  treatment  consists  in 
careful  dieting,  keeping  the  bowels  open,  so  that  they  will  do  as  much  of 
the  kidney's  work  as  possible,  and  the  application  of  poultices  or  hot  appli- 
cations to  the  loins  to  relieve  the  severe  pain.  The  diet  should  consist  largely 
of  milk  diluted  with  rain  water,  fresh  boiled  fish,  tripe  and  well-cooked 
rice.  As  an  aperient  give  bicarbonate  of  potash  one  dram,  boro  citrate  of 
magnesia  one  ounce,  hyposulphite  of  soda  one  ounce;  mix  and  give  from 
one-fourth  of  a  teaspoonful  to  a  teaspoonful  three  times  a  day,  depending 
upon  the  size  of  the  dog.     The  medicine  can  be  mixed  with  water  or  milk. 

Refusing  to  Eat. — When  a  well  dog  refuses  to  eat,  it  is  simply  an 
evidence  that  the  system  is  not  in  condition  to  receive  food,  and  that  Nature, 
the  most  reliable  of  healers,  has  decreed  a  fast.     It  should  be  allowed  to 


MISCELLANEOUS  215 

continue  without  drugging  or  attempting  to  stimulate  or  create  an  artificial 
appetite  until  such  time  as  all  is  well  again,  and  then  the  appetite  will  re- 
turn naturally.  The  greatest  fallacy  that  can  be  practiced  is  to  resort  to 
drugs  and  tonics  directly  a  dog  is  capricious  about  his  food  or  eats  less 
heartily  than  usual.  It  is  all  very  well  to  tempt  the  sick  dog  daily  with 
milk  or  a  little  raw,  scraped  beef  and  gelatine,  but  go  no  farther.  It  is  a 
mistake  to  force  food  upon  a  stomach  that  has  no  desire  for  it  and  surely 
retards   return   to   health. 

The  dog  has  remarkable  control  over  the  muscles  of  the  stomach.  It 
can  vomit  at  will  or  by  eating  a  little  grass.  Emptying  the  stomach  re- 
lieves the  system  of  that  which  is  inimical  to  it,  preventing  many  attacks 
of  sickness  and  greatly  protecting  the  digestive  organs.  Vomiting  with 
the  dog,  therefore,  means  but  little,  and  is  not  a  symptom  of  any  par- 
ticular disease,  unless  repeated  violently  at  short  intervals,  when  poisoning 
is  suggested.  It  is  always  well,  however,  to  examine  the  character  of  the 
vomit.  If  mixed  with  blood  or  yellowish  slime,  gastritis  or  inflammation 
of  the  stomach  is  indicated.  If  mixed  with  bilious,  yellowish  matter,  it  is 
probable  that  the  liver  is  out  of  order. 

Straining  to  Urinate. — Foxterrier,  suffers  at  times  from  some  affection 
of  the  bladder,  trying  to  pass  water  with  much  straining.  Appetite  and 
coat  good,   and   does  not  seem   indisposed  otherwise. 

Answer. — Give  5  grains  of  nitrate  of  potash  occasionally;  allow  a  lim- 
ited quantity  of  boiled  water,  with  10  drops  of  dilute  hydrochloric  acid  once 
a  day. 

Lump  on  Groin. — Black  spaniel  has  a  lump  on  the  groins  like  a  cherry. 
Can  I  have  it  cut  off?  Is  it  a  cancer? 

Answer. — The  growth  is  best  removed  by  ligature.  Tie  a  piece  of  strong 
silk  tightly  round,  and  renew  once  a  week  till  it  breaks  away. 

Sulphur,  Proper  Use  of. — Sulphur  is  a  very  excellent  thing,  probably 
the  finest  blood  purifier  that  exists,  but  it  is  insoluble  as  sulphur,  and 
such  well  meaning  people  as  use  it  in  that  form  might  just  as  well  soak 
a  stone,  a  lump  of  coal,  or,  being  millionaires  and  inclined  that  way,  a 
diamond,  for  any  good  it  will  do  the  animal  for  which  it  is  intended.  If 
you  want  to  give  it  you  can  take  a  leaf  out  of  the  nurse's  book  and  go  in 
for  brimstone  and  treacle,  or  use  the  same  in  the  form  of  a  pill,  or  bolus, 
with  other  things,  such  as  cream  of  tartar,  or  merely  sprinkle  flowers  of 
sulphur  in  the  water  so  that  when  drinking  the  dog  laps  some  of  it  up. 

By  all  of  these  means  the  sulphur  is  received  into  the  system  and  a 
portion  absorbed,  which  is  all  that  was  wanted. 

Milk,  Proper  Use  of. — Milk  is  very  beneficial  and  nutricious  in  combi- 
nation with  different  forms  of  food,  has  also  certain  drawbacks.  Given 
alone  not  only  is  it  frequently  an  indubitable  cause  of  worms,  but,  should 
the  bitch's  stomach  be  at  all  upset,  will  turn  acid  and  provide  the  puppies 
with  diarrhoea,  indigestion  and  all  sorts  of  enjoyable  aids  to  the  relief  of 
monotony.  Consequently,  under  any  circumstances,  it  is  well  to  previously 
boil  it  for  some  minutes,  the  addition  of  one-third  lime  water  is  to  be 
advised.  A  much  safer  concoction  is  a  fairly  strong  solution  of  Nestle's 
preparation  which  does  not  contain  the  ova  of  intestinal  parasites,  and  may 
be  trusted  not  to  go  sour  even  during  a  self-respecting  thunderstorm. 

Ulcers  on  the  Tongue — This  painful  condition  when  met  with  in  the 
dog  is  usually  the  result  of  neglect,  the  teeth  being  allowed  to  accumulate 
tartar.  The  ulcers  may  be  due  to  rough  or  decayed  teeth  as  well  as  to  a 
disordered  stomach,  the  latter  being  a  frequent  cause.  In  the  latter  case 
aperients  must  be  administered,  and  a  plain  diet  be  furnished,  and  in  mod- 
erate quantities,  when,  as  the  condition  of  the  stomach  improves,  the  ulcers 
will  disappear.  If  tartar  is  present,  it  must  be  removed  by  scaling,  and  the 
teeth  afterwards  gone  over  with  an  ordinary  tooth-brush  dipped  into  weak 
listerine.  Any  decayed  teeth  must  be  extracted.  The  ulcers  themselevs 
should  be  slightly  touched  with  nitrate  of  silver 

Milk  for  Weaning  Puppies — I  have  some  greyhound  puppies  I  am  wean- 
ing. I  don't  want  to  use  cow's  milk.  Is  there  any  way  of  making  a  mixture 
that  will  give  a  milk  equal  to  the  bitch's  milk?     Ans. — Yes.     Add  to  15 


216  MISCELLANEOUS 

ounces  of  cow's  milk  2  y2  ounces  of  cream,  2  y2  ounces  of  Plasmon,  and  8 
ounces  of  water.  This  will  be  better  and  fresher  than  giving  condensed  milk 
as  you  know  what  you  are  using. 

Boracic  Solution,  to  Make. — Dissolve  a  teaspoonful  of  powdered  boracic 
acid  in  half  a  pint  of  tepid  water. 

Sore  Rectum — Apply  sparingly  twice  a  day  some  compound  hemlock 
and  tannic  acid  ointment  to  the  part.  "Unguentine"  salve  will  also  heal 
up  quickly. 

How  Often  to  Use  a  Stud  Dog. — Owners  of  stud  dogs  have  often  been 
more  or  less  perplexed  as  to  the  quantity  of  bitches  it  is  advisable  to  allow 
a  dog  to  serve  within  a  given  period.  To  satisfy  any  doubt  on  that  point, 
and  for  the  guidance  of  owners,  one  bitch  per  week  the  year  round,  which 
would  give  two  bitches  per  week  during  the  breeding  season,  is  ample  for 
any  dog. 

A  dog  in  good  health  will  take  no  harm  with  a  harem  of  the  dimen- 
sions indicated,  but  more  visitors  he  has  beyond  that  number  and  greater 
will  be  the  strain  upon  his  system.  Too  much  stud  work  impairs  the  dog's 
procreative  faculties,  and  has  not  only  a  tendency  to  produce  weakness  and 
decripitude  in  the  dog's  hindquarters,  but  a  race  of  weakly  offspring  is  like- 
ly to  result. 

To  Improve  the  Coat. — Rub  all  over  dog,  about  once  or  twice  a  week, 
a  mixture  made  with  methylated  spirits,  one  part;  almond  oil,  seven  parts. 

Giving  Raw  Eggs. — Raw  eggs  can  be  easily  fed,  as  it  is  only  necessary 
to  break  off  the  end  of  the  shell,  open  the  dog's  mouth  with  the  fingers  of 
the  left  hand,  and,  withdrawing  the  tongue  somewhat  with  one  or  two  fingers 
of  the  right  hand  allow  the  contents  of  the  egg  to  run  down  his  throat. 
If  he  refuses  to  swallow,  relaxing  the  tongue  will  usually  have  the  desired 
effect. 

Breaking  Dog  of  Sucking  Eggs. — Make  a  small  hole  and  put  in  enough 
syrup  of  ipecac  to  vomit  a  dog,  then  conceal  the  opening  and  put  the  egg 
where  the  dog  will  find  it.  After  that  the  very  sight  of  an  egg  will  make 
him  sick  at  the  stomach. 

Lack  of  Milk. — To  induce  flow  of  milk,  feed  raw  meat  mixed  with  well 
cooked  oatmeal — the  real  oatmeal,  not  the  breakfast  foods,  but  it  must 
be  well  boiled.     Give  some  milk  between  times. 

Paralysis  Before  in  Heat. — Female  Pom.,  7  months,  about  8  lbs.,  com- 
pletely lost  the  use  of  her  hind  legs,  and  her  front  legs  seem  weak,  muscles 
of  neck  appear  to  be  affected,  as  she  has  difficulty  in  picking  up  food,  and 
has  to  be  fed  by  hand;  cannot  move  about  at  all,  and  frequently  has  twitch- 
ings  in  her  legs. 

Answer. — It  is  paralysis  which  occasionally  occurs  in  bitches  before 
coming  in  heat  for  the  first  time.  Give  three  times  a  day  five  grains  of 
the  homeopathic  trituration  of  nux  vomica.  Keep  the  bowels  well  opened, 
and  see  that  the  bladder  operates  regularly.     Do  not  use  liniment. 

Capsules,  Giving  Medicine  in. — Taken  all  round,  there  is  no  better 
method  of  giving  medicine  to  dogs  than  in  the  form  of  flexible  gelatine  cap- 
sules. And  it  is  a  fact  that  a  dog  can  swallow  a  capsule  much  more  readily 
than  a  pill,  so  that  even  a  large  capsule  will  often  slip  down  the  more 
readily  than  quite  a  little  pill  or  bolus.  Capsules  have  many  advantages; 
they  are  much  cleaner,  of  course,  than  powders  and  liquids  to  begin  with. 
Then  they  can  be  made  to  contain  almost  anything;  and  there  are  very  few 
drugs  that  cannot  now  be  concentrated,  so  that  the  chemist  is  able  to  pro- 
duce quite  a  tiny  capsule  containing  quite  a  large  dose  of  physic.  A  few 
things,  like  castor  oil  and  olive  oil,  cannot  be  concentrated,  of  course;  but 
all  the  more  potent  vegetable  products  and  extracts  like  cascara  sagrada, 
can  be  condensed  into  this  small,  convenient  form.  Then  there  is  the  fur- 
ther advantage  of  disintegration.  A  gelatin  capsule  will  dissolve  in  the 
stomach  far  more  quickly  than  a  pill  will  dissolve;  so  you  get  quicker  ac- 
tion and  speedier  result.  In  point  of  fact,  the  pearl  coating  so  common 
nowadays  on  pills  is  frequently  a  great  disadvantage.  It  is  made  of  French 
chalk,  and  often  forms  almost  a  cement,  the  effect  of  which  is  to  prevent 
the  contents  from  disintegrating.   ^ 


MISCELLANEOUS        ,  21? 

Clogging  of  Nazal  Passage  with  Phlegm. — For  this  smear  the  nose 
once  a  day  with  a  little  pine  tar  oil,  which  the  dog  will  lick  off,  and  it 
will  act  like  magic.  Also  get  some  onions,  cut  up  small  and  tie  around  the 
dog's  neck.  If  the  cough  is  very  troublesome,  boil  down  some  onions  and 
brown  sugar  and  give  a  teaspoonful  every  two  hours.  It  is  a  wonderful 
salve  for  the  sore  throat  that  in  most  cases  the  dog  will  have  in  connection 
with  the  nazal  discharge. 

Bitch  Don't  Get  Properly  in  Heat. — Bull  bitch,  over  4  years.  She  does 
not  come  properly  on  heat;  the  parts  are  swollen  for  more  than  four  weeks, 
and  the  discharge  is  never  colored. 

Answer. — The  next  time  the  bitch  shows  signs  of  coming  in  season, 
give  twice  a  day  for  a  week,  made  into  a  pill  with  resin  ointment,  2  grs. 
of  permanganate  of  potash.     Get  14  pills  made  up. 

Bloody  Discharge  From  Ear. — Irish  terrier  continually  shakes  his  head 
and  bloody  matter  runs  from  the  ear  and  his  eyes  are  also  affected,  can 
you  tell  me  what  to  do? 

Answer. — Syringe  out  the  ears  with  a  tablespoonful  of  alcohol  in  a 
gill  of  warm  water;  let  the  dog  shake  his  ears  and  then  wipe  carefully. 
When  dry  fill  the  orifices  with  boracic  acid  powder.  He  should  be  better 
in  two  treatments.  Wipe  out  the  ears  gently  with  absorbent  cotton  several 
times  a  day. 

Excessive  Thirst. — I  have  a  bull  bitch  that  is  out  of  shape.  She  drinks 
as  much  as  a  quart  of  water  at  a  time.     Is  this  due  to  kidney  trouble? 

Answer. — Give  twice  a  day  an  hour  after  feeding,  three  drops  of 
tincture  of  cantharides  in  a  tablespoonful  of  water.  Continue  for  about 
a  week. 

Hair  Grower. — Tincture  cantharides,  solution  of  strong  amonia,  and 
oil  rosemary,  of  each  1  dram;  glycerine  2  drams;  water  to  make  four 
ounces.  Mix,  and  dab  on  the  ear  twice  a  day.  This  was  used  with  success 
on  a  Pomeranian  that  had  no  hair  on  its  ears. 

Puppy  Rash. — Which  often  develops  after  puppies  leave  the  mother, 
can  be  dried  up,  and  if  puppy  should  lick  it,  all  the  better.  Dissolve  a 
teaspoonful  of  liver  of  surphur  (Sulp.  Potass),  in  a  quart  of  warm  water 
and  apply  once  a  day. 

Bites  Dog  May  Get. — Punctured  wounds,  whether  caused  by  the  bite 
of  a  dog  or  some  sharp  instrument,  if  allowed  to  scab  over  at  the  top  before 
healing  has  been  completed  at  the  bottom,  usually  form  an  abscess;  there- 
fore, all  wounds  of  this  character  should  be  induced  to  heal  slowly  from 
the  bottom.  Wash  the  injured  parts  with  warm  water  to  which  carbolic 
acid  has  been  added  in  the  proportion  of  one  part  to  sixty,  or  use  a  warm 
solution  of  boracic  acid,  then  soak  a  pad  of  absorbent  cotton  in  either  one 
of  these  lotions  and  apply  it  to  the  wound,  cover  with  a  piece  of  oiled  silk 
and  bandage.  This  treatment  should  be  continued  until  the  wound  is  healed. 
If  the  skin  is  torn  the  parts  should  be  cleansed  with  the  carbolic  solution 
and  the  edges  of  the  wound  brought  together  with  stitches,  then  apply  a 
pad  of  carbolic  gauze  over  the  parts  and  bandage  in  position.  There  is 
always  danger  of  suppuration,  and  if  it  occurs  remove  two  or  three  stitches, 
so  as  to  give  the  parts  drainage.  The  patient  should  be  prevented  from 
licking  the  wound.  If  an  abscess  forms,  make  an  opening  at  the  softest 
part  and  drain  the  contents,  then  pack  the  wound  with  sterilized  gauze  or 
oakum,  which  should  be  changed  daily.  This  treatment  keeps  the  wound 
open  until  it  has  healed  from  the  bottom. 

Bald  Spots. — These  are  common,  and  if  the  hair  follicle  is  not  destroy- 
ed it  can  be  stimulated  into  activity,  but  if  dead  treatment  is  useless.  If 
the  baldness  is  caused  by  eczema  rub  the  spots  sparingly  with  a  little  green 
iodide  of  mercury,  was  the  next  day  and  apply  lanolin  ointment.  The 
following  lotion  is  also  useful  in  stimulating  the  activity  of  the  roots  of 
the  hair:  Tincture  of  cantharides  two  drams,  oil  of  rosemary  two  drams, 
glycerine  four  drams,  water  to  make  eight  ounces.  Ap^ly  twice  a  day  and 
use  care  to  avoid  getting  into  the  eyes  and  ears. 

Dogs  Too  Fat. — An  excessive  amount  of  fat  is  as  much  a  disease  as 
•maciation.     It  involves  the  heart  and  lungs,  which  are  weakened,     Th« 


2is  Miscellaneous 

liver  and  kidneys  and  the  stomach  all  share  in  the  decline,  and  the  repro- 
ductive functions  decline.  This  condition,  however,  should  not  be  con- 
founded with  dropsy  or  ascites,  and  the  latter  can  be  differentiated  by  the 
fact  that  in  dropsical  disorders  the  flesh  gives  way  under  the  fingers,  while 
the  flesh  of  a  fat  dog  is  comparatively  firm. 

The  appearance  of  the  urine  may  change  greatly  without  the  subject's 
health  being  in  any  way  affected.  An  excessive  amount  of  urine  indicates 
diabetes.  Dard-colored  urine,  during  acute  attacks  of  disease,  simply 
means  that  the  water  which  is  ordinarily  passed  has  been  disposed  of  by  the 
body  in  some  other  way  and  the  excretion  is  condensed.  Straining  indicates 
prostatic  trouble,  inflammation  or  a  partial  paralysis  of  the  parts.  Blood  in 
the  urine  indicates  an  injury  and  is  usually  alarming. 

Indications  of  Various  Troubles. — The  appearance  of  the  passages  in 
either  diarrhoea  or  constipation  always  gives  some  idea  as  to  what  is  going 
on  within  the  system.  If  the  passages  are  clay  colored,  the  secretion  of  bile 
is  defective,  or  the  bile  passages  are  clogged.  In  any  event,  the  liver  is 
involved.  If  the  passages  are  dark  colored  and  of  a  greenish  tinge,  the 
liver  is  too  active  and  too  much  bile  is  being  poured  into  the  bowels. 
Offensive  smelling  passages  indicate  liver  trouble,  intestinal  irritation  or 
digestive  disorders.  The  presence  of  dark  blood  indicates  irritation  of  the 
bowels.  If  the  blood  is  bright  red  and  there  is  much  straining,  a  sharp  bone 
is  probably  being  passed.  Tne  constipation  that  usually  accompanies  fever 
is  the  result  of  a  drying  up  of  watery  matter,  which  leaves  the  passage 
hard  and  chalky. 

The  whine  or  cry  that  dogs  may  utter  will  indicate  to  those  who  are 
familiar  with  them  something  of  their  condition,  for,  as  a  rule,  while  dogs 
bark  upon  the  slightest  provocation,  they  do  not  cry  except  when  in  serious 
trouble.  A  sharp  cry  will,  of  course,  always  suggest  injury.  In  cases  of 
diseases  of  the  head,  when  dogs  feel  that  a  convulsion  is  coming  on,  they 
often  utter  a  short,  high-pitched  cry  that  has  a  crazy  sound.  In  rabies, 
one  of  the  most  characteristic  symptoms  is  a  peculiar  wail,  a  coarse  blended 
howl,  that  once  heard  will  never  be  forgotten. 

Pawing  at  the  side  of  the  head  suggests  ear  troubles.  Hearing,  early 
in  cases  of  brain  trouble,  is  acute;  later,  after  congestion  becomes  pro- 
nounced, it  is  defective.  Lying  on  the  belly,  especially  on  a  strip  of  cold 
concrete  or  wherever  it  is  coolest,  indicates  a  disordered  liver.  Standing 
with  the  legs  braced  or  sitting  up  with  the  legs  apart,  so  as  to  expand  the 
chest,  indicates  pneumonia.  The  arched  back  indicates  inflammation  of 
the  abdominal  regions.  The  sore,  painful  gait,  general  soreness  and  pained 
expression  indicate  rheumatism,  while  a  slow  gait  indicates  debility  or  old 
age. 

Indigestion,  due  to  many  causes,  can  always  be  suspected  in  aged  dogs 
that  go  off  in  flesh  and  refuse  to  fatten,  no  matter  how  much  they  may  eat. 
It  is  also  to  be  suspected  where  the  breath  is  foul  and  bowels  irregular. 

Tapeworm  is  a  frequent  cause  of  many  obstinate  forms  of  skin  diseases 
that  are  recurrent  and  will  not  yield  permanently  to  external  treatment. 

Cold  After  Whelping. — Should  the  dam  take  cold  after  whelping  it 
may  affect  the  milk  glands,  causing  swelling  and  inflammation.  The  very 
best  remedy  for  this  is  sage  ointment,  made  by  taking  a  good  handful  of 
the  leaves  of  common  garden  sage;  either  green  or  dry  may  be  used. 
Simmer  them  in  a  small  teacup  of  lard  for  two  or  three  hours  over  a  slow 
fire,  then  strain  through  muslin  and  set  aside  to  cool. 

It  should  be  applied  hot  and  plentifully  over  the  swelling,  and  be 
gently  but  well  rubbed  in  three  or  four  times  daily,  until  improvement  is 
manifest,  always  rubbing  toward  the  teat,  never  in  any  other  direction.  If 
sage  cannot  be  procured,  the  bark  of  the  root  of  bittersweet  (celastrus 
scandens)  may  be  used  instead,  as  it  is  also  excellent  for  this  purpose,  al- 
though  not  quite  so   efficient  as  sage. 

Postules  Betweefi  Toes. — At  first  they  are  hard  but  soon  come  to  a 
head  and  break,  making  the  dog's  feet  very  tender.  These  eruptions  are 
quite  common  in  English  bulldogs,  or,  in  fact,  any  dog  that  is  crowded  to 
make  flesh  and  bone  or  over  fed  as  all  pets  are  so  frequently.     Wash  the 


MISCELLANEOUS  219 

parts  carefully,  paint  between  the  toes  with  tincture  of  iodine,  and  lance 
the  pustules,  squeezing  out  all  the  matter.  Dry  and  repeat  the  iodine 
whenever  you  see  a  new  pustule  starting. 

Graduated  Scale  of  Medicines. — There  are  many  medicines  prescribed 
for  dogs  and  as  it  is  desirable  that  the  close  should  be  known,  the  following 
graduated  scale  may  be  taken:  The  dose  for  our  largest  dogs  of  eighteen 
months  old  and  upwards  may  be  taken  as  the  same  as  for  a  man.  Taking, 
then,  the  Mastiff  or  St.  Bernard  as  requiring  a  dose  we  may  call  one  part; 
middle-sized  dogs  may  be  given  from  half  to  three-quarters;  Terriers  of 
from  20  to  30  pounds,  a  quarter;  and  Toy  dogs  from  a  twelfth  to  an  eighth 
part.  In  regard  to  age:  The  mature  dog,  one  part;  a  year  old,  three-quar- 
ters; six  to  nine  months,  half;  and  a  pup  of  from  four  to  six  weeks,  one- 
eighth.  The  dose  must  further  be  graduated  by  considerations  of  the  con- 
stitution and  strength  of  the  dog. 

Discharge  in  Bitch  in  Whelp  and  After. — Syringe  passage  out  thorough- 
ly every  day  with  a  teaspoonful  of  powdered  alum  dissolved  in  half  a  pint 
of  warm  water,  and  give  twice  a  day,  made  into  a  pill,  two  grains  of  sul- 
phate of  iron,  which  continue  for  a  week.  The  latter,  the  dose  for  medium 
sized  dog,  toy  dogs  less. 

Liniment,  a  Good. — It  often  happens  that  a  good  liniment  is  needed 
around' the  kennel,  and  a  formula  that  has  been  successfully  used  on  both 
sides  of  the  Atlantic  might  well  be  procured  and  kept  on  hand  for  the  ar- 
rival of  the  unexpected.  Such  a  liniment  is  the  following:  Take  equal  parts 
of  the  following  and  mix:  Spirits  of  turpentine,  laudanum,  rape  oil  and 
liquid  ammonia.  The  latter  should  not  be  the  strong,  but  the  ordinary  va- 
riety. 

This  is  most  useful  in  strains,  sprains,  stiffness,  bruises  and  similar  ac- 
cidents, but  it  should  not  be  used  where  the  flesh  has  been  broken  or  cut. 
It  is  a  very  handy  thing  to  have  around,  and  the  number  of  times  that  a 
bottle  of  it  will  be  called  into  use  will  greatly  surprise  every  one  who  has 
not  employed  a  similar  preparation. 

Bedding  at  Whelping  Time. — There  is  nothing  better  for  bedding,  nor 
perhaps  so  good,  as  clean  straw,  and  a  great  deal  of  this  is  not  recommended 
at  whelping  time,  simply  because  immediately  before  doing  so,  a  bitch  will 
push  all  this  away  from  her  and  get  down  to  the  bare  boards  or  whatever 
the  flooring  of  her  quarters  is.  It  may  be  on  account  of  the  heat,  for  they 
suffer  greatly  even  in  cold  weather  in  this  respect,  or  it  may  be  on  account  of 
cleanliness,  or,  again,  a  habit  acquired  in  the  wild  state  of  making  a  shelter 
all  round  them,  just  in  the  same  way  that  you  will  see  even  a  Toy  dog 
trample  round  two  or  three  times  before  lying  down,  which  is  said  to  be 
derived  from  the  original  wild  dog's  method  of  making  himself  as  com- 
fortable as  circumstances  will  permit. 

Kennel  Lameness. — This  is  a  rheumatic  affection  of  the  fore-quarters, 
and  particularly  of  the  muscles  connecting  the  shoulder-blade  with  the  trunk. 
It  is  caused  by  exposure  to  wet  and  cold,  and  generally  by  the  dog  being 
kept  in  damp  or  draughty  kennels.  The  symptoms  are  stiffness  and  sore- 
ness of  one  or  both  shoulders.  This  is  most  noticeable  when  the  dog  is 
running  down  hill,  or  when  jumping,  as,  of  course,  then,  practically,  the 
whole  of  the  weight  of  the  body  is  on  these  parts.  Left  to  himself,  the 
dog  shows  an  indisposition  to  move,  and  experiences  pain  if  the  hand  is 
passed  over  his  shoulders;  indeed,  even  when  an  attempt  is  made  to  touch 
him,  he  shrinks  from  the  hand  with  a  snarl  or  anticipatory  cry  of  pain. 
In  long-standing  cases,  power  of  movement  of  the  forequarters  is  almost 
lost;  and  many  are  incurable. 

The  treatment  most  advisable  is  to  give  a  warm  bath,  and  after  thor- 
oughly drying,  rub  the  parts  well  with  a  liniment  composed  of  equal  parts 
spirit  of  turpentine,   spirit   of  hartshorn,   and   laudanum. 

Growing  Coat  on  a  Collie. — Dress  dog  all  over  twice  a  week  for  a 
fortnight  with  cocoanut  oil,  kerosene  and  olive  oil  in  equal  parts,  well 
mixed  together.     Do  not  over  brush  the  dog. 

In  case  of  a  dog  of  any  breed  with  bare  spots,  Eberhart's  Skin  Remedy 
will  be  found  to  be  a  great  hair  grower,   (has  never  get  failed  for  me), 


220     i  MISCELLANEOUS 

applied  once  or  twice  daily,  on  the  bare  spots,  well  rubbed  in  with  the  hand. 

To  Increase  Bone  in  Puppy. — Give  puppy  some  large  veal  bones,  or  soft 
beef  bones  to  gnaw  on  and  twice  a  day  a  small  dose  Parish's  Chemical 
Food  after  eating.  The  chemical  food  consists  of  phosphate  of  lime,  also 
phosphate  of  iron. 

Severe  Nervousness. — Dog  may  seem  scared  out  of  his  life,  run  and 
hide  if  it  hears  a  footfall,  may  only  be  induced  to  eat  by  putting  its  food 
under  its  very  nose,  &c.  Dog  may  in  time  improve,  especially  by  very 
kind  treatment.  A  course  of  tonic  medicine,  like  chemical  food,  would 
also  materially  assist,  as  this  medicine  contains  phosphates.  The  food  can 
be  obtained  at  any  good  drug  store. 

Dogs  Eating  Own  Filth. — Some  dogs  have  this  disgusting  habit,  just 
why  is  hard  to  say.  The  only  tangible  reason  would  seem  to  be  a  depraved 
appetite,  caused  by  worms,  the  cause  of  so  many  troubles  in  dogs.  The 
cure  is,  to  watch  dog  and  when  she  has  a  passage  cover  the  feces  with 
powdered  cayenne  pepper,  aside  from  scolding  or  punishing  dog  when 
caught  in  the  act.  After  dog  has  had  a  good  taste  of  the  pepper  it  will  be 
very  liable  to  quit  the  habit. 

Milk  Trouble. — Several  cases  have  come  under  notice  recently  of  milk 
trouble  affecting  bitches.  The  commonest  cause  of  this  is,  of  course,  loss 
of  puppies.  We  might  go  further  and  qualify  the  term  loss  by  saying^that 
very  often  it  is  caused  by  the  senseless  removal  of  puppies,  as,  for  instance, 
when  a  mongrel  litter  arrives,  which  it  is  desired  to  get  rid  of  as  soon  as 
possible.  To  take  all  the  puppies  away  from  the  mother  not  only  con- 
stitutes gross  cruelty,  but  sheer  folly  as  well,  for  it  is  most  likely  that 
the  bitch  in  that  case  will  develop  milk  trouble  in  the  shape  of  tumors  or 
abscesses,  and  she  will  never  be  the  same  animal  again  after  mischief  of 
this  kind  has  once  been  brought  on. 

Supposing,  however,  that  a  milk  abscess  should  form,  the  proper 
treatment  to  adopt  is  to  use  hot  fomentations  continuously.  If  the  matter 
is  taken  in  hand  early  enough,  it  will,  of  course,  be  possible  to  draw  the 
milk  away,  and  this  will  avoid  the  possibility  of  any  abscess  forming. 
Should,  however,  the  latter  unfortunately  occur,  it  is  certainly  advisable 
that  qualified  advice  should  be  taken  and  a  veterinary  surgeon  should  be 
asked  to  deal  with  it,  lest  it  should  ultimately  involve  recourse  to  an  opera- 
tion. Hot  fomentations  or  poultices,  in  any  case,  should  be  applied  until 
the  arrival  of  the  veterinarian,  as  no  possible  harm  can  be  done  by  this 
means. 

Canker  of  the  Mouth. — There  is  trouble  to  which  the  term  canker  is 
applied,  and  that  is  with  regard  to  the  mouth  and  teeth.  Dogs  which 
are  kept  indoors  and  are  pampered  with  dainty  food  of  various  kinds  and 
do  not  get  a  sufficient  amount  of  exercise  are  very  liable  to  dyspepsia,  which 
is  almost  invariably  accompanied  by  an  unhealthy  state  of  the  teeth  and 
mouth.  If  these  be  not  attended  to,  inflammation  of  the  gums  is  set  up, 
and  at  the  same  time  the  teeth  are  apt  to  decay,  and  altogether  a  very  un- 
comfortable state  of  things  is  produced.  Prevention  is,  of  course,  better 
than  cure  in  all  cases  of  this  kind,  and  the  way  to  prevent  it  is  to  stop 
giving  dainty  tit-bits  and  to  feed  the  dog  on  plain,  wholesome  food,  taking 
care  also  that  the  animal  has  an  increased  amount  of  exercise,  together 
with  a  little  corrective  medicine,  such  as  a  compound  rhubarb  pill  now  and 
again,  or  an  occasional  mild  dose  of  Epsom  salt. 

It  is  also  a  good  plan  to  use  a  mouth  wash  composed  of  myrrh  and 
borax,  a  bottle  of  which  can  be  obtained  from  any  good  pharmaceutical 
chemist.  This  needs  to  be  diluted  with  water,  and  should  be  sponged  on 
the  inflamed  gums.  Needless  to  say,  if  the  teeth  show  any  signs  of  decay, 
they  should  at  once  be  extracted  by  a  competent  veterinary  surgeon,  be- 
cause if  one  tooth  goes  wrong,  it  is  quite  likely  to  start  decay  in  a  number 
of  the  others.  The  lotion  recommended  above  ought  to  be  used  twice  or 
three  times  a  day,  and  the  alterative  medicine  should  be  given  every  two 
or  three  days,  according  to  circumstances. 

Flatulency. — Is  not  very  common  in  adult  dogs,  but  oftener  met  with 
in  puppies.     It  Is  unmistakable  evidence  of  indigestion.     For  immediate  re- 


MISCELLANEOUS  221 

lief  the  treatment  should  consist  in  giving  to  a  twenty-p«und  dog  half  a 
teaspoonful  of  carbonate  of  magnesia  in  a  little  milk;  large  dogs  a  teaspoon- 
ful;  or  give  a  dose  of  castor  oil,  and  follow  with  5  to  15  grammes  of  car- 
bonate of  bismuth  three  times  a  day  dry  upon  the  tongue.  For  permanent 
cure,  correct  the  indigestion. 

Ticks. — Ordinarily  feed  upon  vegetable  food,  but  they  have  no  hesita- 
tion in  attaching  themselves  to  dogs  and  gorging  themselves  almost  to 
bursting  upon  blood.  They  are,  so  far  as  family  connections  are  concerned, 
related  to  spiders,  and  in  form  they  somewhat  resemble  the  latter.  In  size 
they  vary  from  a  pin  head  to  a  small  flea.  When  small  they  are  a  light 
gray  in  color,  but  become  darker  as  they  gorge  themselves  with  blood. 
They  fasten  themselves  on  the  skin  with  such  tenacity  as  to  be  torn  in  two 
before  letting  go.  When  once  they  get  into  a  kennel  no  time  should  be 
lost  in  beginning  treatment,  as  they  lodge  and  breed  in  the  bedding  and 
woodwork  as  well  as  on  the  dog. 

The  lime  and  sulphur  lotion  given  under  Lice,  can  be  used  for  ticks, 
or  Eberhart's  Skin  Remedy  will  do  the  work,  if  well  rubbed  in  and  allowed 
to  remain  on,  and  repeated. 

Teaching  a  Puppy  to  Lead. — Quite  a  job  in  some  cases,  and  in  others, 
not  so  hard.  Best  time  to  do  this,  is  when  they  are  six  months  old.  Put  a 
collar  on  pup,  he  won't  mind  uiis  much,  let  him  wear  it  a  week,  then  some 
day,  quarter  of  an  hour  before  his  supper  tie  him  up  to  some  convenient 
spot.  He  will  promptly  proceed  to  try  to  strangle  himself,  and  this  not 
found  pleasant,  will  quit  this,  and  then  probably  crouch  to  the  ground, 
giving  it  up  as  a  bad  job,  but  looking  very  miserable;  but  brighten  up  when 
you  bring  him  his  supper.  Save  a  few  pieces  of  meat  in  your  hand,  untie 
him,  take  hold  of  the  lead,  hold  out  a  piece  of  the  meat  and  coax  him  to 
come  to  you.  Repeat  the  lesson  if  neccessary,  but  as  soon  as  he  under- 
stands the  lesson  the  finishing  of  the  training  will  not  take  but  a  day  or  two. 
Wounds. — Dalziel's  article  on  Wounds  is  given  complete:  "For  the  pur- 
pose of  description  these  can  be  divided  into  Incised,  Lacerated,  Punctured 
and  Contused. 

"Incised  Wounds  are  those  caused  by  a  clean  cut,  such  as  a  sharp-edged 
instrument.  Lacerated  wounds  are  those  in  which  the  tissues  are  torn  and 
the  edges  of  the  wound  irregular;  punctured  wounds  those  caused  by  stabs 
or  probes;  while  contused  wounds  are  those  due  to  crushing  and  bruising. 

"The  process  of  healing  is  accomplished  in  different  ways,  according  to 
the  nature  of  the  wound  and  the  condition  of  the  surrounding  parts. 
"1.   First  intention — that  is,  by  immediate  reunion   of  the  parts. 
"2.  Adhesive  inflammation,  in  which  there  is  an  exudation  of  lymph  in 
both  cut  surfaces. 

"3.  Granulation,  where  the  wound  gradually  heals  by  the  formation  of 
proud  flesh. 

"4.  The  union  of  granulations. 

"5.  The  commoner  and  more  usual  method  of  healing,  under  a  scab. 
"In  incised  wounds  the  parts  should  be  cleansed,  and  the  bleeding  ar- 
rested, any  hair  should  be  removed,  and  the  lips  or  edges  of  the  wound 
brought  into  immediate  contact  by  sutures.  Where  practicable,  the  whole 
should  be  covered  with  dry  carbolized  tow  and  a  bandage.  A  muzzle  must 
be  worn,  or  the  stitches  will  be  torn  out,  causing  an  unsightly  wound  that 
must  then  heal  by  granulation,  while  instead  of  a  very  alight  scar,  a  large 
one  will  be  the  result.  In  adhesive  inflammation  the  mode  of  treatment  is 
the  same;  it  has,  however,  been  proved  beyond  doubt  that  dry  dressings 
are  much  preferable  to  any  other.  The  old  method  of  dressing  with  oils, 
etc.,  is  no  longer  continued.  The  commonest  method  of  healing  is  by 
granulation  under  a  scab  as  already  noted. 

"In  wounds  I  have  found  the  carbolized  tow  and  carbolized  gauze  the 
most  successful.  The  object  of  these  is  to  prevent  suppuration,  if  possible, 
by  keeping  the  hair  aseptic.  Especially  is  this  the  case  when  one  ig  trying 
to  heal  a  wound  by  first  intention,  or  by  adhesive  inflammation.  In  other 
wounds  it  keeps  them  healthy.  The  wound  must  be  constantly  washed  and 
kept  thoroughly  clean.     If  it  is  a  serious  ope,  or  there  is  much  discharge, 


222  MISCELLANEOUS 

it  should  be  dressed  twice  a  day.  Where  proud  flesh  appears,  it  should 
be  kept  under  by  the  application  of  nitrate  of  silver;  again  if  the  wound 
is  unhealthy-looking,  and  the  healing  process  is  retarded,  a  slight  applica- 
tion of  nitrate  of  silver  will  often  stimulate  it  to  healthier  growth. 

"In  all  cases  where  the  wounds  heal  by  the  process  of  granulation  it 
is  absolutely  necessary  that  the  repairing  process  should  begin  at  the  bot- 
tom, and  so  gradually  close  the  wound.  Should  it  occur  at  the  surface,  the 
pus  will  be  imprisoned,  burrow  between  the  muscles,  and  find  an  exit  or 
exits  elsewhere  in  the  shape  of  abscesses;  or  the  pus  will  form  sinuses,  which 
will  necessitate  making  large  incisions.  All  wounds  should  be  examined 
well  for  the  purpose  of  detecting  the  presence  of  foreign  matter,  and  again 
hemorrhage   (bleeding)  must  be  stopped  before  suturing. 

"In  puncturd  wounds,  the  wound  should  be  explored  by  means  of  a 
silver  probe,  so  that  the  exact  extent  of  the  injury  can  be  ascertained,  and 
foreign  matter  removed.  If  this  latter  is  overlooked,  the  result  is  often 
blood-poisoning  and  death.  Punctured  wounds  must  always  heal  by  granu- 
lation; where  there  is  any  suspicion  of  foreign  matter,  always  have  re- 
course to  a   poultice. 

"Contused  wounds  are  generally  successfully  treated  by  poulticing  and 
fomentations,  but  if  the  injury  is  severe,  sloughing  may  take  place.  The 
final  healing  is  by  granulation.  Always  bear  in  mind  to  keep  the  wound 
clean. 

"To  summarise  the  general  treatment  of  wounds.  First  stop  the 
bleeding,  remove  the  hair  and  examine  for  the  presence  of  foreign  matter, 
and  where  this  exists  remove  it.  If  there  is  any  doubt  about  it,  apply  a  hot 
poultice  night  and  morning  until  satisfied  that  the  wound  is  cleansed; 
where  it  is  practicable,  always  insert  sutures  to  keep  the  edges  together. 

"As  I  have  already  said,  dry  dressings  are  the  most  successful,  such 
as  carbolized  tow,  and  gauze  (Listers'  carbolized  gauze)  with  a  pledget  of 
tow  over  it,  kept  in  position  by  a  bandage.  In  some  situations  this  is  not 
possible.  The  wound  should  be  dressed  night  and  morning  with  carbolic 
lotion:  Carbolic  acid  1  part,  water  20  parts,  with  a  little  glycerine  added. 
Or  a  saturated  solution  of  boracic  acid  will  do  equally  as  well." 


FEEDING  223 


FEEDING 


Feeding. — Here  is  an  important  subject  which  should  be  well  understood. 
No  dog  over  six  months  old  should  ever  have  over  two  meals'  per  day,  and 
regularity  in  eating  is  just  as  important  in  dogs  as  it  is  in  human  beings. 
Dogs  should  have  plain  food,  but  don't  be  afraid  of  giving  them  some  meat 
once  a  day,  cooked,  and  cut  up  small,  avoiding  fat,  and  also  not  feeding 
veal  or  pork,  neither  of  which  are  good  for  dogs,  beef  and  mutton  are  both 
good — we  eat  meat  every  day,  and  why  not  our  dogs.  Never  feed  lights,  not 
digestible,  and  you  might  as  well  feed  leather.  Cooked  liver  is  always  rel- 
ished by  a  clog,  and  once  a  week  of  cooked  liver  is  a  treat,  it  also  acting  as 
a  laxative,  but  not  much  nourishment  in  liver  and.  a  dog  fed  too  much  liver 
would  not  thrive,  gain  much  flesh,  or  keep  in  good  condition.  Now  as  to 
milk — I  don't  go  much  on  too  much  sweet  milk,  don't  think  it  is  good  for  a 
dog,  and  if  given  milk  daily,  would  soon  get  very  tired  of  it.  Sour  milk 
once  in  a  while,  is  better.  Buttermilk  is  better  yet,  and  in  summer  time 
I  give  my  dogs  all  around,  some  buttermilk  as  an  "extra.'  once  a  week.  As 
to  feeding,  I  am  writing  now  as  to  the  older,  or  matured  dogs,  and  not  as 
to  the  puppies,  as  to  their  feeding  being  advised   upon   elsewhere. 

I  have  on  an  average  of  seventy-five  dogs  in  my  kennel,  and  here  is 
their  bill  of  fare.  For  breakfast,  winch  is  served  about  seven  o'clock  in 
summer  and  eight  o'clock  in  winter,  they  get  Spratt's  Patent  Dog  Cakes  for 
their  breakfast,  fed  dry.  but  broken  up  into  small  pieces  (excepting  to  young 
puppies  that  yet  require  soft  food  and  to  be  fed  oftener  than  twice  a  day). 
This  I  break  up  with  a  hammer  on  the  board  walk  in  their  yards,  or  in 
wet  weather,  on  the  kennel  floor,  spreading  it  out  so  the  dog's  don't  get  to 
fighting.  I  let  them  all  pitch  in  and  cat,  which  they  do  with  a  relish,  and 
why  shouldn't  they?  It  is  a  prepared  food  for  dogs,  composed  of  beef,  flour, 
oatmeal,  bone  meal,  etc.,  in  fact  articles  that  a'dog  needs.  When  your  pup- 
pies' teeth  are  developed  sufficiently  then  they  can  have  it,  but  broken  up 
smaller.  Spratt's  Patent  make  a  special  prepared  Puppy  Cake,  which  is 
more  suitable  for  the  youngsters.  See  their  page  advertisement  in  front  of 
book,  or  I  can  furnish  you  with  it. 

Spratts  now  Kibble  their  dog  cakes,  run  them  through  a  machine,  so 
they  are  about  the  size  of  a  hickory  nut,  and  this  saves  the  trouble  of  break- 
ing it  up — the  dogs  like  it,  although  some  of  my  larger  dogs  will  take  a 
whole  cake  and  chew  it  up  like  a  bone. 

As  a  rule,  it  is  best  to  feed  it  dry,  although  occasionally  it  is  a  good 
plan  to  moisten  it  with  either  hot  or  cold  water  or  with  soup.  Dry,  it 
serves  the  purpose  of  a  bone  and  good  for  cleaning  teeth,  sweetening  breath 
and  is  digestible.  I  let  my  dogs  eat  about  what  they  want  for  breakfast, 
but  if  any  is  left,  don't  let  it  lay,  but  pick  it  up  and  save  for  next  morning,  in 
action  it  is  a  perfect  regulator,  and  its  use  will  give  a  dog  a  good  coat,  a 
clean  breath  and  sound,  handsome  teeth.  Until  supper  time,  about  five 
o'clock,  they  get  nothing,  and  this  is  as  it  should  be.  The  F.  H.  Bennett 
Biscuit  Co.  (see  their  advertisement),  make  a  very  good  dog  cake,  called 
Maltoid  Milk — Bone,  made  in  the  shape  of  a  bone,  and  I  have  used  this 
also,  and  the  dogs  like  it.  Now  as  to  supper,  the  main  meal,  as  it  should 
be  for  a  dog,  here  is  the  bill  of  fare  as  fed  for  years  in  my  kennel.  I  get 
meat  sent  out  from  my  butcher  in  Cincinnati  daily,  beef,  mutton,  and  some- 
times, a  sheep  or  calves  head  or  two  and  a  big  lot  of  fresh  bones,  and  my 
man  cooks  this  up  in  a  big  kettle,  then  cuts  the  meat  up  into  small  pieces 
and  trims  the  bones  down  some,  then  in  the  soup  we  put  Conner's  Cooked 
Dog  Food,  which  is  a  cereal,  (see  their  advertisement),  and  makes  a  medium 
thick  mush.     Now  when  feeding  time  comes  for  supper,  each  dog  is  fed  a 


224  FEEDING 

pan  of  this  mush  in  which  is  put  some  of  the  cut-up  cooked  meat,  and  this 
well  mixed  or  stirred  up  in  the  mush,  so  the  dog  can't  pick  out  just  the 
meat.  After  supper,  then  the  hones,  every  dog  getting  one  or  two  to  gnaw 
on — as  their  desert,  and  they  all  love  a  hone  to  chew  up,  which  is  good 
for  all  dogs.  If  any  chicken  bones,  or  small  bones  that  they  would  be  likely 
to  split  up  and  make  slivers  of,  these  are  put  in  the  stove,  as  they  are 
dangerous.  The  soup  is  occasionally  varied  by  adding  to  the  cooking  of  the 
meat,  vegetables,  but  which  are  hard  to  get  here,  and  this  adds  a  relish  to 
it.  You  must  use  your  judgment  as  to  how  much  meat  to  give  each  dog, 
some  dogs  that  are  too  fat,  and  too  greedy,  must  not  be  given  all  they 
would  eat.  If  a  dog  leaves  any  of  his  meal  in  his  pan,  don't  let  it  remain 
there  to  get  stale,  but  gather  it  up.  -Quite  a  lot  of  the  dogs,  those  I  can 
depend  on  to  not  fight  at  meal  time,  are  fed  together  in  the  main  yard 
from  traps  or  larger  pans.  Pans  are  all  gathered  up  and  washed  that  night 
so  as  to  be  sweet  and  clean  for  next  day — cleanliness  very  important  always. 
Now  comes  the  "dessert" — the  bones,  which  we  throw  out  in  the  yards  so 
that  each  one  has  a  large  bone  to  gnaw  on — and  don't  they  enjoy  this.  We 
watch  them  while  they  are  at  the  bones,  where  "the  push"  are  together,  to 
guard  against  fights  that  might  occur,  as  dogs,  like  some  children,  are  sel- 
fish and  greedy,  and  try  to  take  the  other  dog's  bone  from  him.  Generally, 
a  word  from  me  will  stop  this  trouble,  but  if  not  there  is  a  whip  handy  and 
it  is  properly  used  to  quell  the  disturbance  promptly.  Chicken  bones,  or 
any  small  bones  like  from  a  lamb  chop,  are  very  dangerous — bones  that 
they  can  chew  up  into  slivers;  as  you  must  know  that  all  such  must  pass 
down  and  through  all  the  intestines,  which  means  a  dangerous,  risky  trip, 
as  it  is  not  straight,  but  a  very  winding  and  crooked  one,  the  great  danger  in 
this  sliver,  if  it  passes  through  the  throat,  is  in  puncturing  or  getting  lodged 
in  its  trip  through,  which  would  mean  death  to  the  dog.  Burn  all  your 
Chicken  Bones  excepting  the  necks. 

Vegetables  and  rice  mixed  in  the  mush  you  have  made  are  very  good 
for  a  change,  and  the  bill  of  fare  can  be  thus  varied  once  a  week  or  so, 
which  will  be  appreciated  by  the  dog.  Carrots  and  beets  are  the  beat  to 
use,  cabbage  not  agreeing  with  all  dogs;  potatoes  are  too  fattening  and 
possess  very  little  nourishment.  A  baked  sweet  potato  is  relished  by  dogs, 
but  the  same  objection  applies  here,  besides  leaving  a  sweet  taste,  and  dogs 
should  never  have  anything  sweet. 

All  dogs  should  have  more  or  less  hard  feed  two  or  three  times  a  week 
at  any  rate,  a  bone  or  a  biscuit,  or  something  they  can  use  their  teeth  upon 
and  not  bolt.  A  dog's  teeth  are  just  as  Important  to  its  continued  well- 
being  as  those  of  a  human  being,  and  as  we  cannot  provide  our  four  footed 
friends  with  a  false  set,  every  care  should  be  exercised  in  order  to  preserve 
the  teeth. 

Of  vegetables,  onions,  carrots,  turnips,  beet  root,  and  a  few  potatoes 
are  the  most  nutritious  and  fat  forming.  Cabbages  and  similar  kinds  are 
good  for  the  blood,  but  contain  few  positive  properties.  Oatmeal  is  fatten- 
ing but  heating;  rice  forms  an  ideal  food  for  toys,  being  very  easily  digested, 
satisfying,  but  not  too  stimulative;  pearl  barley,  sago,  tapioca,  and  semolina 
may  all  be  made  use  of  as  changes.  If  you  do  use  milk,  see  it  is  fresh,  and 
then  boil  it.  Milk,  in  combination  with  other  material,  as  for  instance  in  the 
way  of  a  rice  or  bread  pudding,  would  be  all  right,  or,  used  with  eggs. 

Eggs  are  especially  useful  when  nourishment  has  to  be  given  with  a 
spoon.  Cooked  liver  is  not  a  bad  thing  to  mix  in  the  food  once  in  awhile, 
but  not  oftener  than  once  a  week. 

Cornmeal  much  or  baked  corn  bread  for  a  change  in  winter  is  all  right, 
but  much  too  heating  to  the  blood  in  summer.  Candy,  cake,  or  anything 
sweet  or  too  greasy  should  never  be  given  a  dog — you  might  just  as  well 
give  them  poison  in  small  doses.  Many  a  dog  has  died  before  its  time  due 
to  this  mistaken  kindness  of  its  master  or  mistress.  When  darling  Fido  so 
frightens  his  mistress  with  that  low  moan,  succeeded  by  that  painful  and 
prolonged  howl,  with  his  back  arched,  his  feet  tucked  in  towards  each  other, 
and  vainly  trying  every  possible  posture  to  escape  the  pain,  he  is  merely 
suffering  the  natural  result  of  that  last  lump  of  sugar.     True,  Fido  may 


FEEDING       \  225 

have  had  sugar  frequently  without  suffering  in  this  way,  hut  the  last  lump 
is  the 'straw  that  breaks  the  camel's  back;  and  no  surprise  need  be  felt  if 
persistence  in  the  kindly-meant  but  objectionable  practices  induces  repeated 
attacks  of  colic,  ending  in  inflammation  and  death. 

I  have  been  called  in  many  a  time  to  see  a  sick  dog  that  was  in  misery 
due  solely  to  improper  and  over-feeding,  but  could  do  it  no  good,  for  it 
was  so  fat,  asthmatical  and  wheezy  that  it  could  hardly  walk  or  get  its 
breath;  no  medical  skill  could  avail  and  the  pet  had  to  die — not  its  fault, 
but  its  owner's.  Take  my  advice  and  warning — don't  feed  your  pet  these 
poisons  every  time  it  begs  you,  perhaps  by  "sitting  up"  or  "speaking,"  but 
treat  it  with  true  kindness  by  feeding  as  I  have  advised,  and  never  oftener 
than  twice  a  day.  Always  keep  clean,  fresh  water  handy,  and  in  summer 
see  that  it  is  never  exposed  to  the  sun.  Eggs  are  good  for  dogs,  but  I  have 
found  that  in  cases  of  a  sick  dog  with  a  weak  stomach  very  few  of  them 
can  hold  it  down.  Chicken  gravy,  or  the  gravy  with  a  little  flour  in  it,  as 
the  wife  makes  it  in  stewing  chicken  giblets,  is  often  accepted  by  a  sick  dog 
after  refusing  everything  else  that  has  been  offered  it. 

A  sick  dog  will  sometimes  eat  a  stewed  beef  kidney. 

If  you  feed  potatoes,  feed  mashed  potatoes,  as  these  the  dog  can  digest 
easier.  If  you  have  only  one  dog,  get  him  used  to  eating  dog  cakes  dry, 
for  his  breakfast,  and  for  his  supper,  you  may  have  enough  left  from  your 
lunch  and  dinner  for  the  one  dog,  and  that  bone  from  the  porterhouse  steak, 
or  from  the  roast,  will  be  appreciated  by  him. 

Quite  a  valuable  article  is  the  following,  taken  from  American  Fancier 
and  Stock-keeper,  as  to  feeding  of  Toy  Dogs.  In  it  are  good  ideas,  especially 
applicable  to  dogs  at  bench  shows,  but  good  to  adopt  even  for  dogs  at  home. 

"The  proper  way  to  feed  toy  dogs  is  an  everlasting  subject  of  debate 
where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  show  corners.  There  is  no 
proper  way  per  se.  The  question  of  suitable  feed  all  depends,  both  upon 
the  breed  and  the  individual.  Sloppy  food,  for  toys  as  well  as  in  the  inter- 
ests of  bigger  dogs,  must  be  avoided,  and  food  that  is  solid  and  somewhat 
concentrated  is  indicated.  In  the  case  of  Pomeranians  and  other  long  coated 
dogs  stronger  food  is  more  desirable  than  for  smooths.  That  is,  the  drain 
of  the  coat  on  the  dog's  system  must  be  met.  Likewise  the  nervous  energy 
of  these  small  dogs  must  be  taken  into  consideration.  The  Pomeranian,  for 
instance,  will  wear  himself  to  a  shadow  much  sooner  than  the  easy  going 
pug  or  toy  spaniel.  In  the  former's  case  a  diet  varied,  digestible  and  nutri- 
tious, much  in  a  little,  is  the  proper  thing,  and  nothing  is  better  than  under- 
done (rare),  roast  beef  and  chicken,  which  to  vary  the  diet  may  be  alternated 
with  fresh  tripe  and  white  fish,  from  which  all  bones  must  be  taken  out. 

Pet  dogs,  whose  vigorous  constitutions  and  active  appetites  call  for  a 
greater  bulk  of  food,  should  be  fed  on  boiled  rice  or  crumbled  stale  bread 
in  conjunction  with  the  meat,  the  meat  being  fed  last.  It  is  not  good  to 
fill  these  little  gluttons  out  with  milk  or  as  much  meat  as  they  will  eat. 
Plain  rice  is  not  heating  and  does  not  fatten  like  meals.  Should  a  toy  dog 
take  to  the  dog  biscuit  these  may  also  be  given  chopped  dry. 

"A  great  many  toy  dogs  suffer  more  or  less  from  cankered  teeth  brought 
on  by  fermentation  in  the  stomach,  in  most  cases  due  entirely  to  an  indiscreet 
diet  of  sloppy,  sweet  foods.  Eschew  all  these  and  bring  the  little  chaps 
down  to  a  dry,  hard  diet  if  possible,  or  a  diet  which  will  make  them  chew 
and  not  lap  or  bolt  their  foods.  Nature  provided  the  dog  in  its  natural 
state  with  a  stomach  that  would  digest  nails,  as  the  saying  goes,  but  civili- 
zation has  altered  all  this  for  the  pet  dog,  as  well  as  his  owner,  and  modern 
excesses  work  their  ills  on  both.     So  the  different  conditions  must  be  met." 

The  following  written  by  Dent,  is  especially  intended  to  apply  as  to 
Feeding  of  Hunting  Dogs: 

"The  dog  is  a  carniverous  animal,  and  although  domestication  and 
association  with  man  have,  in  some  respects,  altered  or  affected  his  organs 
of  digestion,  he  thrives  best  upon  a  mixed  diet  or  one  containing  both  meat, 
grain  and  vegetables.  The  proportions  of  these  depend  altogether  upon  the 
individual's  constitution,  peculiar  existing  state  of  health,  and  the  work  he 
is  called  upon  to  do.    These  matters  can  only  be  determined  by  experiment 


226  FEEDING 

and  observation.  Food  and  water  are  to  the  muscular  system  what  fuel  and 
steam  are  to  the  locomotive.  Muscular  exertion  calls  for  a  destruction  of 
muscular  elements;  the  destruction  of  muscular  elements  generates  heat  in 
varying  degrees  and  a  large  amount  of  effete  poisonous  matter  that  the  kid- 
neys and  bowels  are  called  upon  to  remove. 

"If  the  clog  is  in  good  condition,  the  muscles  firm,  elastic  and  properly 
nurtured  by  a  fit  diet,  muscular  effort  will,  if  severe,  produce  only  the 
minimum  amount  of  heat  and  effete  matter.  If  the  animal  is  in  poor  condi- 
tion, the  muscles  soft  and  flabby,  surrounded  by  fat,  slight  exercise  will 
consume  a  large  amount  of  this  tissue  and  produce  a  corresponding  amount 
of  heat  and  waste  products.  And  it  is  these  poisonous  waste  products  that 
the  athlete,  horse  and  dog  have  to  contend  with,  and,  no  matter  how  carefully 
trained  it  is,  these  waste  products  eventually  limit  their  performance. 

"A  dog's  wind  may  be  all  right,  he  is  ready  to  go  and  wants  to  go, 
but  if  the  production  of  these  waste  products  is  too  rapid  for  their  removal 
by  the  kidneys  and  other  organs,  they  remain  in  the  system  and  partially 
paralyze  the  nerves  controlling  the  muscles  and  they  refuse  to  act. 

"The  fat  or  muscle-making  possibilities  of  various  foods  and  the  ani- 
mal's actual  condition  can  be  studied  very  intelligently  by  the  use,  after  ex- 
ercise or  work,  of  a  small  clinical  thermometer.  When  the  maximum  amount 
of  work  short  of  actual  exhaustion  produces  the  minimum  degree  of  heat 
as  registered  by  the  thermometer,  the  animal  is  in  the  best  condition  and 
the  foods  that  will  afford  these  results  are  the  foods  to  be  adopted,  and  the 
foods  that  produce  the  largest  amount  of  heat  for  a  given  amount  of  work 
are  to  be  avoided,  as  a  general  working  system. 

"It  can  be  laid  down  that  the  quantity  of  meat  can  be  reduced  during 
the  close  season  and  increased  during  the  working  season  to  almost  an  all- 
meat  diet  with  satisfactory  results.  Oatmeal  and  unbolted  wheat  flour  are 
the  most  desirable  of  grains.  Wheat  dour,  rye  or  barley  shorts  should 
be  baked  as  bread  pones  and  allowed  to  cool  and  afterward  broken  up  and 
softened  with  meat  liquor,  soup  or  milk.  Cornmeal  is  a  popular  food  with 
trainers,  probably  on  account  of  its  price,  ease  of  obtaining  and  preparing, 
but  it  is  a  fat  producer  and  not  a  muscle  builder.  No  horse  trainer  would 
feed  it  to  a  thoroughbred  when  conditioning  him  for  a  race,  and  while 
trainers  may  feel  satisfied  with  the  way  their  dogs  thrive,  I  am  sure  they 
would  be  capable  of  greater  muscular  effort  if  fed  on  one  of  the  other  grains. 
"A  very  good  way  of  preparing  food  for  a  siring  of  dogs  is  to  purchase 
a  few  sheeps'  heads,  a  couple  of  beeves'  heads,  or  a  liver  or  two,  or  twenty 
or  thirty  pounds  of  chucks  or  neck  pieces  chopped  fine.  Boil  the  heads  in  a 
kettle  until  they  are  thoroughly  cooked,  and  the  meat  can  easily  be  scraped 
from  the  bones.  This  meat  should  then  be  chopped  or  shredded  into  small 
pieces  and  mixed  with  from  three  to  six  times  its  weight  of  whole  wheat 
flour,  rye  or  corn  meal,  softened  and  worked  up  with  soup  liquor.  To  this 
may  be  added  enough  black  molasses  to  slightly  sweeten  the  whole  and 
then  it  is  to  be  thoroughly  baked  over  a  slow  fire  and  afterward  allowed 
to  not  only  cool,  but  partially  dry,  in  which  condition  it  will  keep  indefi- 
nitely. When  it  is  to  be  fed,  break  it  up  into  pieces,  and  feed  dry  or  soften  it 
with  meat  or  vegetable  soup.  This  food  can  also  be  improved  by  adding 
vegetables,  such  as  carrots,  turnips,  beets,  onions  or  cabbage,  in  the  propor- 
tion of  one  pound  of  vegetables  to  from  five  to  ten  pounds  of  meat  and 
grain. 

"The  sportsman  owning  only  one  or  two  dogs,  who  will  condition  his 
dogs  on  food  prepared  in  this  way,  and  who  will  carry  with  him  a  suffi- 
cient quantity  to  provide  for  his  dogs  while  on  a  hunting  trip,  will  be  amply 
repaid  by  their  superior  condition,  and  he  will  never  go  back  to  the  make- 
shift diet  of  table  scraps  that  is  too  often  resorted  to. 

"Dog  biscuits  simplify  the  feeding  problem  and  the  professional  trainer 
or.  sportsman  who  uses  them  as  a  staple  diet  can  go  on  an  extended  hunting 
trip  or  even  to  remote  sections  of  the  country,  where  there  are  no  conven- 
iences for  preparing  food,  and  feel  sure  of  his  dog  having  a  properly  bal- 
anced ration.  The  ordinary  dog  biscuit  contains  only  a  small  proportion  of 
meat,   hardly  sufficient  for  a  dog  during  the  close  season.     When  hunting 


FEEDING  227 

or  training  it  is  advisable  to  have  a  special  biscuit  prepared  with  the  pro- 
portion of  meat  doubled  or  trebled,  or  feed  fresh  meat  in  addition  to  the 
regular-biscuit. 

"The  number  of  meals  a  dog  should  be  given  daily  is  a  matter  fre- 
quently discussed.  I  prefer  to  give  a  light  meal  in  the  morning  (fed  dry), 
such  as  two  or  three  dog  biscuits  or  their  equivalent,  and  a  full  meal  at 
night.  The  morning  meal  should  be  given  at  least  one  hour  before  the  dog 
is  put  down  in  the  field,  so  as  to  enable  the  stomach  juices  to  partially  digest 
it.  Under  no  circumstances  should  a  dog  be  worked  directly  after  feeding 
a  full  meal.  The  stomach,  like  all  muscles  and  organs,  requires  during 
action  an  increased  blood  supply.  During  exercise  the  blood  is  drawn  from 
the  stomach  and  other  internal  organs  to  other  parts  of  the  body  and  the 
food,  instead  of  being  digested,  lies  as  a  heavy  load  with  a  liability  to  fer- 
ment and  produce  diarrhea  or  dysentery  that  will  incapacitate  the  animal. 
Table  scraps  and  'pick  ups,'  if  clean  and  fresh,  free  from  fat  and  grease 
(they  seldom  are),  may  be  tolerated  for  house  or  pet  dogs,  but  the  sports- 
man who  attempts  to  take  his  dog  through  a  hard  season's  hunting  on  such 
food  is  blind  to  his  own  and  his  dog's  interests." 

Feeding  Puppies. — Now  as  to  feeding  of  puppies.  As  soon  as  they  are 
weaned,  which  should  be  done  gradually,  and  which  you  will  find  under 
head  of  "Breeding,"  their  food  should  consist  of  boiled  or  scalded  milk 
(never  feed  raw  milk  to  puppy)  in  which  soak  some  bread.  Potatoes  and 
gravy,  bread  and  gravy,  and  soups  with  plenty  of  vegetables  in,  such  as 
carrots,  turnips,  beets  and  rice.  Chicken  gravy  or  the  gravy  from  stewed 
giblets  in  which  some  flour  has  been  added,  is  a  very  nourishing  and  fa- 
vorite food  for  puppies.  If  the  scalded  milk  is  found  to  be  too  constipating, 
add  some  oatmeal  porridge  to  thicken  it.  When  he  is  cutting  his  teeth, 
crumbs  of  toast,  hard  cracker  or  crusts  of  stale  bread  are  needed.  No  one 
cares  to  eat  the  outside  slice  of  a  loaf,  so  that  may  be  made  stale,  hard,  and 
broken  up  for  the  liUle  dog,  well  soaked  in  the  soup  or  milk.  Spratt's 
Patent  makes  a  special  puppy  biscuit  that  is  very  good  to  feed  to  the  young- 
sters as  soon  as  their  teeth  will  admit  of  chewing  same,  which  biscuit 
should  be  broken  up  into  small  pieces.  You  can  also  feed  this  softened  in 
soup.  When  the  puppy  is  about  up  to  three  months  old,  1  would  then  give 
this  biscuit  for  one  meal  a  day,  fed  dry  but  broken  into  small  pieces.  A 
very  little  cooked  beef  and  mutton,  cut  up  very  fine  can  now  be  given 
mixed  in  with  their  other  foods,  and  some  of  the  mush  of  stale  bread  (see 
article  on  Feeding)  will  be  all  right  to  give  them,  in  which  you  can  mix 
thoroughly  the  finely  cut  up  meat,  but  not  too  much  meat  until  a  little 
older.  Puppies  up  to  three  months  of  age  should  be  fed  four  times  a  day 
and  then  gradually  cut  down  to  three  meals  a  day,  which  will  generally  be 
often  enough  to  feed  until  they  get  to  be  from  four  to  five  months  old.  At 
six  months  old,  or  about  there,  I  put  them  on  the  regular  bill  of  fare  with 
the  grown  dogs,  excepting  that  their  portion  of  cooked  meat  is  not  so 
liberally  dealt  out  at  supper,  but  the  large  bones  they  have  free  access  to 
with  the  older  dogs.  I  don't  believe  in  keeping  a  puppy  on  a  milk  diet  too 
long,  and  think  it  best  to  break  them  off  from  this  when  they  get  along  to  be 
three  or  four  months  old  and  let  water  be  their  drink. 

Burn  all  your  chicken,  turkey  and  fish  bones  or  any  small  bones  like 
those  from  a  lamb  chop.  Small  bones  are  dangerous.  Dogs  chew  them  up 
rapidly  and  being  tender,  make  slivers  of  them,  and  if  one  of  these  small 
slivers  gets  into  a  dog's  throat  the  wrong  way  or  fails  to  pass  through 
without  any  detention — it's  generally  a  case  of  "good-bye  dog."  Many  dogs 
have  died  from  this  alone. 

Avoid  sharp  bones,  especially  fish  and  chicken  bones,  as  you  would 
poison,  for  they  frequently  are  more  effective  in  killing  a  dog  than  is 
strychnine  or  some  other  deadly  agent;  in  that  poison  can  be  neutralized 
by  powerful  antidotes  or  removed  by  the  use  of  emetics,  while  a  bone  finds 
its  way  into  the  intestines  and  does  its  deadly  work  without  hindrance. 

Confections,  cake  and  dainties  of  all  sorts  should  also  be  tabooed  from 
the  bill  of  fare;  they  are  not  the  natural  food  of  a  dog,  and  beside  their 
weakening  effect  create  a  false  and  dainty  appetite  which  interferes  with 


228  i      BREEDING 

the  regular  meals,  causing  a  smaller  quantity  to  be  consumed  owing  to 
desire  to  get  something  nice  or  an  artificial  repugnance  to  substantial  food' 
if  there  is  a  possibility  that  "sugar"  will  be  forthcoming. 


BREEDING  AND  RAISING  OF  PUPPIES 


Bitches  come  in  season  on  an  average  of  twice  a  year,  about  every  five 
to  seven  months,  and  the  question  is  often  asked  whether  it  is  advisable 
to  bceed  a  bitch  during  the  first  period  of  oestrum.  The  answer  depends 
much  upon  the  breed  and  state  of  maturity.  As  a  general  thing,  it  is  not 
well  for  a  young  bitch,  which  can  not  be  fully  developed  at  the  age  of  ten 
months,  to  undergo  the  strain  on  vitality,  which  maternity  causes.  Some 
terriers  mature  quickly,  but  the  large  breeds  should  certainly  not  be  bred 
until  at  least  eighteen  months  old,  and  in  any  case  it  is  wise  to  allow  the 
first  period  to  pass. 

Another  question  asked,  is  whether  a  bitch  should  be  bred  at  every 
period,  or  rather,  whether  it  is  wise  to  do  so.  This  depends  a  good  deal 
upon  the  vigor  of  the  bitch,  but  unless  a  bitch  be  looked  upon  as  a  mere 
machine  to  produce  puppies  for  the  benefit  of  the  owner's  pocket,  it  is  well 
to  allow  the  bitch  to  be  served  every  other  period.  When  a  bitch  is  bred 
twice  a  year  and  has  a  litter  each  time,  the  strain  upon  her  vitality  must  be 
very  great,  and  unless  the  mother  is  more  than  ordinarily  vigorous,  later 
litters  will  show  a  corresponding  weakness. 

A  bitch  first  shows  signs  of  coming  in  season  by  bleeding.  Now,  if  you 
are  watching  for  her  and  take  note  of  the  clay  the  bleeding  begins,  then 
one  method  to  determine  when  she  is  ready  to  take  the  dog  is  to  count 
from  this  day,  and  from  the  tenth  to  twelfth  day  she  is  ready  for  the  dog. 
This  rule  does  not  always  work,  however,  for  I've  had  bitches  that  were  ready 
and  willing  to  be  served  even  in  the  sixth  day  and  yet  others  would  not  take 
the  dog  till  the  fifteenth  day.  Quite  a  good  plan  is  to  take  her  out  for  a 
walk  on  chain  when  you  think  she  is  about  ripe,  and  let  her  meet  the  first 
d  )£  she  sees,  or,  if  you  have  a  dog  on  your  place,  allow  her  near  this  dog 
for  a  minute,  and  if  she  would  accept  this  dog,  then  you  can  be  certain  that 
she  Is  ready  to  be  bred  and  take  her  to  the  dog  you  have  selected.  If  you 
try  this  plan,  be  careful  or  else  she  might  fool  you  and  get  served  by  this 
dr?  »he  had  met.     Dogs  are  quick  workers. 

After  a  visit  to  the  dog,  the  mother  will  carry  her  progeny  about  63 
or  64  days,  as  a  rule,  but  they  sometimes  whelp  a  few  days  sooner  or  later, 
and  you  need  not  be  alarmed  unless  they  go  by  from  five  days  to  a  week, 
when  very  likely  trouble  is  in  store  and  assistance  to  be  given,  or  better  yet, 
call  in  a  good  veterinarian.  I  have  had  bitches  whelp  a  week  ahead  of  time; 
such  cases  are  rare,  however,  and  have  raised  the  pups  by  extra  attention 
given  for  a  few  days  as  to  often  putting  the  pups  to  the  teats  to  nurse  if 
thay  did  not  get  there  themselves.  We  can  no  reckon  the  time  exactly.  Much 
depViVs  upon  the  health  and  strength,  and  even  mental  idiosyncrasy. 

The  best  time  for  the  visit  is  early  spring,  as  the  puppies  have  then 
all  the  long  summer  before  them  to  romp  and  get  strong  in. 

At  the  time  of  mating,  particularly,  exercise  should  be  well  regulated, 
and  must  be  insisted  on.  Whilst  at  this  period  exercise  is  essential,  ex- 
haustive work  would  be  detrimental.  The  amount  of  exercise  should  de- 
pend on  the  individual,  a  gross  and  lusty  bitch  needs  plenty  of  freedom, 
while  one  the  reverse  would  need  less  exercise,  in  proportion  to  her  physical 
strength. 

For  a  couple  weeks  before  bitch  is  due  to  whelp,  she  must  have  a  daily 
walk  up  to  within  a  day  or  so  of  the  time  due,  but  this  must  be  gentle  as 
she  is  very  heavy. 

tp  have  a  goed  litter  of  puppies,  a  bitch  must  not  onky  possess  blood 


BREEDING         I    "r »         ^  i        r     -  229 

free  from  all  taint  of  disease,  but  she  must  be  strong  and  in  good  condition 
about  the  time  of  oestrum,  or  heat. 

If  you  have  in  any  way  neglected  her,  or  if,  through  circumstances 
over  which  you  have  probably  had  no  control,  she  has  fallen  off  a  bit,  begin 
to  get  her  in  form  three  months  before  the  time  of  her  coming  on.  It  will 
pay  you  to  do  so. 

The  following  as  to  giving  the  bitch  some  medicine  to  open  her  bowels 
I  found  in  Field  and  Fancy,  but  who  written  by  I  do  not  know: 

"Some  there  are  who  deem  it  wrong  to  give  a  mild  cathartic  Imme- 
diately before  the  time  of  whelping.  A  violent  purge  is  certainly  to  be  de- 
precated, but  it  is  the  firm  opinion  of  the  writer  that  the  bitch  is  mater- 
ially helped  and  benefited  by  a  little  opening  medicine.  At  any  rate,  that 
course  is  invariably  followed  by  the  most  successful  accouchers  among 
women,  and  it  must  be  obvious  to  the  merest  novice  that  when  the  system 
is  greatly  upset,  or  about  to  undergo  a  severe  ordeal,  the  condition  of  the 
stomach  and  bowels  is  of  the  highest  importance.  A  moderate  dos«J  of 
castor  oil,  say  a  dessertspoonful  for  a  30-lb.  dog,  or  even  some  sweet  olive 
oil,  will  do  all  that  is  required  without  inducing  excessive  straining.  Such 
has  been  my  custom  for  a  good  many  years,  and  events  have  proved  its 
value." 

My  plan  is  to  watch  the  passages  of  bitch  just  before  she  whelps,  and 
if  she  is  constipated,  to  then  give  her  a  mild  dose  of  castor  and  olive  oil. 

I  believe  when  a  bitch  is  just  ready,  that  one  service  is  sufficient,  and 
rarely  ever  allow  my  own  to  be  served  but  once,  but  to  -make  assurance 
doubly  sure,  a  second  service  after  an  interval  of  twenty-four-  hours,  would 
be  advisable.  If  you  are  sending  her  away  to  some  kennel  to  be  bred,  ship 
her  not  later  than  the  eighth  day. 

It  would  be  as  well  if  you  could  go  with  your  favorite  instead  of  send- 
ing her,  but  most,  if  not  all,  good  breeders  are  not  only  gentlemen,  but  lovers 
of  dogs  and  will  take  the  greatest  care  of  the  bitch. 

The  length  of  time  of  a  bitch  being  in  season  is  from  fifteen  to  twenty 
days  as  a  rule,  but  there  are  exceptions  to  this.  If  a  bitch  is  served  late  in 
season,  the  service  generally  prolongs  the  season  or  period  in  which  she 
would  willingly  accept  the  dog.  A  very  fat  bitch  should  never  be  bred, 
as  in  so  doing  you  are  liable  to  lose  not  only  the  pups,  but  the  bitch  her- 
self. After  the  mating,  the  bitch  should  be  kept  secluded  (no  food  or  water 
having  boen  given  her  directly  before),  nor  any  food  for  six  hours  after. 

Now,  for  the  next  two  months  the  bitch  must  require  every  attention. 
For  safety's  sake  she  should  be  kept  away  from  her  old  canine  friends  for 
about  a  week.  She  must  not,  however,  be  denied  exercise,  and.  all  through- 
out the  time  she  is  carrying  her  puppies  she  must  have  plenty  of  exercise  and 
fresh  air.  But  it  must  not  be  of  too  boisterous  a  character;  .and:. I  would  not 
permit  a  bitch  in  whelp  to  play  with  a  dog  of  her  own  size,  or  a  larger  dog, 
too  much.  A  collision  between  her  and  a  heavy  companion  might  be  very 
serious  indeed. 

If  your  bitch  is  a  house  pet  and  has  been  accustomed  to  jumping  upon 
chairs,  the  safest  plan  to  guard  against  accidents  is  to  tip  the  chairs  up 
against  the  wall  for  a  week  or  two  before  she  is  due  to  whelp — if  you  are 
yet  keeping  her  in  the  house.  When  very  heavy,  she  can  not  always  make 
the  same  jump,  and  should  she  miss,  striking  against  chair  and  fall  back, 
it  would  likely  mean  the  death  of  her  and  the  pups. 

For  a  few  days  after  being  bred,  quietude  and  exercise  on  chain  is  ad- 
visable for  safety,  and  should  then  follow  exercise  twice  daily,  in  proportion 
to  constitution,  temperament  and  condition,  and  as  she  nears  the  time  of 
whelping,  the  chain  may  be  again  necessary,  as  a  restraint. 

From  the  time  bitch  is  bred,  the  food  need  not  be  different  from  usual 
until  five  or  six  weeks  gone,  and  showing  heavy  with  pUps,  when  she  will 
of  course  need  more  to  eat.  Feed  her  now  more  liberally  with  a  fair  pro- 
portion of  beef  and  mutton.  Raw  beef  cut  up  fine,  is  very  gxrod  in  winter, 
a  little  once  a  day  as  she  approaches  the  time  of  whelping.  Bread  and  milk 
and  especially  soups  will  be  very  good  for  the  other  meals;  soft  foods  and 
of  an  opening  nature  being  desirable.     A  large  beef  or  veal  bone  to  gnaw 


230  BREEDING  .  ' 

on  is  good.  Plenty  of  milk  is  also  what  she  needs.  The  nearer  her  time 
gets  the  more  she  will  need  to  eat.  Feed  her  three  times  a  day  during  the 
last  two  weeks.  On  the  feeding  of  the  bitch  during  this  time  will  depend 
the  size  and  healthfulness  of  the  coming  litter,  and  when  the  pups  are  born, 
a  warm  pan  of  milk  will  be  relished  by  the  dam,  in  which  may  be  put  a 
little  baking  soda.  Soft  food  should  be  continued  for  a  few  days,  when  a 
return  to  ordinary  diet  will  be  safe. 

Many  times  a  female,  after  giving  birth  to  her  young,  refuses  to  eat 
and  loses  her  appetite.  A  few  drops  of  assafcetida  given  in  water  and  a 
little  rubbed  on  her  gums  usually  restores  her  appetite,  and  with  a  good 
appetite  usually  comes  a  good  flow  of  milk. 

It  is  usually  after  a  lapse  of  sixty-three  days  that  the  pups  come,  and 
some  days  before  the  event  a  suitable  secluded  place  should  be  provided 
for  her.  It  is  important  that  a  record  should  be  kept  of  date  she  was  bred. 
Have  her  stall  or  kennel  prepared  a  week  before  she  is  due.  If  in  winter 
this  must  be  warm,  but  with  light  and  ventilation.  The  latter  must  only 
be  furnished  from  the  top. 

I've  found  the  best  plan  to  be,  to  securely  tack  down  an  old  carpet  or 
blanket. on  the  floor  which  enables  the  puppies  to  get  a  foothold  when  first 
born,  and  thus  crawl  to  their  mother.  The  bitch  will  scratch  and  dig  for 
several  days  before  whelping  and  try  her  best  to  scratch  up  the  carpet,  so 
put  in  plenty  of  tacks.  This  carpet  should  be  exchanged  for  a  clean  one,  the 
next  day  after  she  whelps.  A  little  of  Clayton's  or  the  Vermilax  Co.'s  flea 
powder  sprinkled  around  in  her  box  shoufcl  be  clone  daily.  A  loose  carpet 
in  box  is  not  advisable,  as  a  puppy  is  liable  to  get  under  it  and  get  smothered. 

Not  all  bitches  are  good  mothers,  some  being  too  nervous,  and  through 
this  nervousness  and  from  fear  that  they  may  lose  some  of  their  children, 
or  that  you  might  take  one  away,  they  get  excited,  and  lay  on  a  pup  or  two. 

A  very  safe  plan  I've  found,  and  I  always  so  fit  up  the  stall  or  box, 
is  to  fasten  a  shelf  a  few  inches  from  the  floor  to  the  sides  and  back  of  box, 
extending  out  a  few  inches  so  that  if  she  gets  nervous  and  turns  around  too 
often  to  get  a  place  to  suit  her,  the  pups  are  protected  from  being  laid  on 
by  this  shelf. 

It  is  generally  best  not  to  disturb  the  bitch  at  the  time  of  whelping, 
but  in  case  of  fever  or  excitement,  or,  in  fact,  if  anything  indicating  trouble 
be  detected,  it  may  be  necessary  for  some  one  to  remain  with  her,  and  for 
the  pups  to  be  taken  away  and  kept  warm  until  normal  conditions  return. 
Veterinarian  skill  may  be  necessary  in  some  conditions,  but  as  a  warm  place 
for  the  pups  is  all  that  is  needed  for  a  couple  of  hours  after  birth,  it  is  easy 
to  take  the  milk  from  the  teats  with  the  hand  if  the  fever  is  likely  to  have 
rendered  it  injurious  to  the  pups  and  the  fever  may  be  quickly  remedied, 
and  a  non-injurious  flow  made  in  time  for  the  pups  to  rejoin  their  mother. 

The  very  best  advice  I  can  give  the  breeder  is,  do  not  interfere;  the  few 
cases  where  it  will  be  necessary  to  do  so  will  only  add  force  to  this  rule. 
When  help  is  called  for,  find  a  verterinary  surgeon  who  understands  treat- 
ment of  dogs,  or  one  who  makes  dogs  a  specialty.  Many  veterinarians  are 
all  right  as  to  horses  and  cows,  but  woefully  ignorant  as  to  dogs.  If  manual 
assistance  has  to  be  given,  avoid  unnecessary  force.  When  labor  is  protract- 
ed and  bitch  seems  to  need  assistance  to  create  more  labor  pains,  then  give 
her  Fellows'  Compound  Syrup  of  Hypophosphate,  two  hours  apart;  the  dose 
would  be  a  half  teaspoonful  for  a  bitch  of  15  to  25  lbs.,  and  three-quarters  of 
"a  teaspoonful  for  a  25  to  40-lb.  bitch,  with  a  teaspoonful  for  larger  ones  up 
to  60  lbs.,  while  for  very  large  bitches  such  as  a  St.  Bernard,  a  teaspoonful 
and  a  half  would  be  the  dose.  Get  one  ounce  of  the  Fellows'  Compound 
Syrup  of  Hypophosphate  and  have  your  druggist  add  to  it  four  grains  of 
quinine.  I  have  found  this  very  valuable,  much  better  and  safer  than  ergot 
(the  liquid  extract  of  rye),  which  is  liable  to  work  both  ways,  favorable 
and  otherwise,  expanding  or  contracting  the  womb.  Such  medicine  is  not 
always  necessary,  as  in  very  many  cases  Nature  takes  care  of  the  matter, 
and  it  is  only  needed  and  advised  to  be  given  when  bitch  requires  assistance 
— the  object  being  to  create  more  labor  pains  if  bitch  needs  the  same.  In 
several  cases  of  bitches  that  required  the  Fellows'  Syrup  of  Hypophosphate 


BREEDING  231 

I   also   gave   an   injection   per  vagina   of  glycerine  put   into   hot   water  and 
injected  luke  warm,  but  of  course  not  hot. 

The  cases  of  greatest  danger  are  where  a  bitch  has  been  allowed  to 
stray  during  cestrum,  and  was  bred  to  a  dog  of  much  larger  size  than  her- 
self; and  very  finely  bred  and  highly  pampered  bitches  often  suffer  greatly, 
and  die  in  the  act  of  giving  birth.  In  healthy  parturition  even,  considerable 
time  is  often  occupied,  the  rest  between,  being  of  great  service  in  supporting 
her  against  the  prostration  consequent  in  the  event.  The  bitch  should  not 
be  interfered  with  in  these  intervals,  and  it  is  then  foolish  to  try  and  force 
food  upon  her.  In  all  cases  where  difficulty  from  wrong  presentation  or 
the  disproportioned  size  of  the  pups  occur,  both  from  motives  of  prudence 
and  humanity  the  veterinary  surgeon  should  be  consulted  for  his  obstertic 
knowledge,  and  skill  in  manipultion  will  save  much  unnecessary  suffering, 
and  probably  the  lives  of  mother  and  pups. 

Sometimes  there  are  one  or  two  very  late.  You  may  go  away,  assur- 
ing yourself  all  is  over,  and  that  your  bitch  has  a  litter  of  only  five,  and 
come  back  in  the  morning  to  find  seven  all  sucking  away  like  as  many 
leeches,  and  the  mother  looking  so  proud  and  pleased  she  wouldn't  ex- 
change places  with  a  princess  royal. 

Should  the  clam's  supply  of  milk  prove  to  be  inadequate,  it  will  be 
necessary  either  to  place  her  puppies  under  the  care  of  a  foster  mother 
or  else  to  do  the  best  possible  under  the  circumstances  with  artificial  food. 
The  former  is  always  a  risky  alternative  as  it  is  not  every  bitch  that  will 
take  kindly  to  the  whelps  of  another,  and  unless  she  has  been  upon  the 
premises  for  some  time  so  as  to  be  accustomed  to  the  surroundings  it  is 
unlikely  that  she  will  do  them  justice.  Then,  too,  if  she  has  not  whelped 
at  very  nearly  the  same  time  as  the  other,  there  is  likely  to  be  trouble  over 
her  milk  supply.  Consequently  it  is  safest  and  best,  though  possibly  a  little 
more  troublesome,  to  bring  the  puppies  up  by  hand  if  their  mother  has  not 
enough  milk  to  provide  them    with   nourishment. 

Fortunately,  however,  for  the  dog  owner,  Sprabt's  Patent  step  in  here 
to  assist  him  in  his  dilemma,  as,  in  the  orphan  Puppy  Food  prepared  by  this 
Company,  a  most  excellent  substitute  for  mothers'  milk  will  he  found;  in 
fact,  there  is  nothing  procurable  that  can  compare  with  it.  In  the  case  of 
many  substitutes  for  the  natural  nourishing  fluid  of  pups,  it  will  be  found 
that  the  stomachs  of  the  youngsters  are  liable  to  be  upset  by  some,  while 
in  other  instances  the  puppies  do  not  thrive,  but  in  fact  dwindle  away. 
Wtten  Spratt's  Puppy  Food  is  used  in  a  kennel  there  is  no  prospect  of 
either  of  these  evils,  if  the  food  is  prepared  in  the  proper  manner  and 
ordinary  attention  is  paid  to  matters  of  detail.  In  the  first  place  infant 
puppies  should  be  fed  frequently,  every  care  being  at  the  same  time  taken 
to  avoid  their  stomachs  being  overtaxed.  Then,  too,  it  must  be  remembered 
that  even  the  best  of  cooked  food  is  apt  to  turn  sour  and  become  unwhole- 
some'if  allowed  to  stand  too  long,  or  if  the  vessels  it  is  kept  in  are  not 
perfectly  clean.  The  stomachs  of  young  puppies  are  so  easily  upset  that 
too  much  care  cannot  be  exercised  in  the  preparation  of  their  food.  An 
indigestible  diet  is  no  doubt  responsible  for  many  untimely  deaths  among 
young  stock. 

Provided  that  all  goes  well  with  the  whelps,  they  will  begin  to  crawl  about 
soon  after  their  eyes  are  open,  which  will  be  at  the  age  of  nine  days. 

When  the  pups  are  a  day  old  the  mother  should  be  encouraged  to  leave 
them  for  an  hour's  daily  exercise;  but  this  should  never  be  of  a  violent 
character,  likely  to  cause  milk  fever. 

When  the  pups  ai«e  six  to  seven  weeks  of  age  the  weaning  should  com- 
mence, and  it  is  a  good  plan  to  commence  this  by  removal  of  the  bitch  for 
a  few' hours  at  first,  and  afterward  by  keeping  her  apart  the  whole  day, 
only  permitting  her  to  he  with  the  family  at  night.  The  puns  should  then 
be  fed  on  goat's  or  cow's  milk,  boiled,  with  one-third  as  much  warm  water 
added  and  bread  crumbled  and  soak  in  it  and  given  while  still  slightly 
warm.  I  prefer  condensed  milk  to  either,  which  is  sure  to  be  uniform  and 
not  as  conducive  to  worms  as  cow's  milk.  This  should  be  slightly  reduced 
with  warm  water.     After  a  few  days,  and  when  the  pups  have  taken  to  this 


232  BREEDING-       \ 

diet  a  little  meal  may  be  used  instead  of  bread;  oatmeal,  wheat  middlings 
and  cornmeal,  mixed,  is  good;  and  in  case  of  looseness  of  the  bowels  a 
little  rice  should  be  substituted.  At  this  period  it  is  also  well  to  add  a 
little  lime  water  to  the  milk  or  give  fish  scraps,  for  this  supplies  phos- 
phorous necessary  for  bone  forming.  If  fish  is  given  be  careful  and  sure 
that  all  bones  are  first  removed.  Pups  thus  fed  rarely  get  rickets,  or  the 
giving  way  of  the  pasterns  or  lower  leg  joints,  because  the  bone  is  not 
strong  enough  to  carry  the  weight  of  the  body.  This  should  never  occur 
in  any  well-regulated  kennel  where  the  pups  are  properly  nourished,  but  if 
it  does,  two-thirds  of  lime  water  with  the  milk,  a  teaspoonful  of  cod  liver 
oil  twice  daily,  or  more  if  the  breed  is  a  large  one,  will  soon  remedy  it. 
After  awhile  soups  and  a  little  vegetable  matter  may  be  substituted. 

I  give  puppies  when  weaning  them  boiled  milk  in  which  some  bread 
has  been  well  mixed  and  soaked,  gravy  with  bread  mixed  in  it — chicken 
gravy  they  eat  with  a  relish — and  a  little  later  on,  add  to  the  milk  and 
bread,  or  gravy  and  bread,  just  a  little  cooked,  and  cut  up  fine,  beef  or  mut- 
ton. Remember,  however,  that  after  a  pup  once  gets  a  taste  of  meat  tbat 
it  is  very  liable  to  want  meat  and  refuse  anything  else.  See  article  on 
Feeding. 

In  case  of  the  mother  dying  a  few  days  after  birth  of  her  puppies, 
always  use  condensed  milk  thinned  with  warm  water  and  add  lime  water 
at  the. rate  of  a  teaspoonful  for  each  puppy.  Lime  water  is  one  of  the  best 
worm  destroyers  for  young  puppies. 

""""  Should  a  mother  dog  lose  her  milk  or  not  have  enough  at  any  time 
after  a  puppy  has  its  eyes  open,  make  a  gruel  of  corn  starch,  putting  a 
little  sugar  in  it;  teach  the  little  fellows  to  eat  it,  which  can  be  readily  done 
by  putting  their  noses  in  it  and  allowing  them  to  lick  their  lips,  and  you 
will  find  them  to  soon  learn  to  like  it  and  thrive  on  it.  Or,  feed  them  with 
Spratt's  Orphan  Puppy  Food,  as  mentioned  previously. 

When  I  have  a  litter  of  puppies  that  are  weak  in  bone,  their  legs  not 
strong  enough  to  sustain  the  body,  I  give  the  mother  three  times  a  day  until 
pups  are  weaned,  some  precipitated  phosphate  of  lime  which  creates  bone. 
Dose  for  toy  dogs,  a  pug  for  instance,  would  be  an  even  teaspoonful.  For 
dogs  the  size  of  a  pointer,  one  and  a  half  teaspoonful,  and  for  large  breeds 
like  a  St.  Bernard  or  mastiff,  two  teaspoonfuls.  Mix  the  lime  up  In  a  little 
milk  and  all  bitches  will  readily  drink  it  down,  as  it  is  of  a  pleasant  taste. 
Better,  however,  do  the  mixing  where  they  do  not  see  you,  for  if  they  got 
the  idea  that  it  was  medicine  they  might  not  take  it.  Many  a  dog  will  run 
and  hide  at  the  sight  of  a  spoon,  so  great  being  their  aversion  to  taking 
medicine. 

Other  troubles  sometimes  arise  at  this  time,  which  are  often  caused  by 
worms,  but  still  more  frequently  result  from  unsuitable  food  or  foods  of 
innocent  nature  that  have  undergone  noxious  changes,  and  still  oftener  by 
overloading  the  stomach,  until  indigestion  sets  in  and  then  the  food,  Instead 
of  supplying  nutriment,  becomes  an  irritant;  pains  arise,  swelling  of  the 
organs  occur,  and  unless  quickly  relieved  the  pups  quickly  succumb.  These 
symptoms  are  usually  attributed  to  worms,  which  frequently  cause  similar 
troubles.  Another  difficulty  with  like  symptoms  is  a  slight  chill,  sending  the 
blood  from  the  surface  to  the  internal  organs,  producing  congestion  therein, 
and  it  is  sometimes  that  serious  disorders,  not  easily  distinguished  from 
any  of  these,  are  caused  by  worm  remedies  being  given,  without  knowledge 
of  their  effects,  or  due  preparation  on  the  part  of  the  patient.  All  these 
troubles  may  be  classed  as  gastro-enteritis,  and  the  same  treatment  applied. 
There  should  be  an  immediate  cleaning  out  of  the  bowels  with  castor  or 
sweet  oil,  and  the  use  of  opiates  afterward  generally  give  best  results, 
either  paregoric  or  laudanum,  the  former  preferred,  because  of  the  camphor 
in  it. 

The  opiate  should  be  given  every  hour,  until  the  pain  is  relieved,  and 
then  nourishment  in  the  form  of  warm  milk  should  follow,  with  the  appli- 
cation of  artificial  heat,  or  stimulation,  in  case  of  any  tendency  to  chill. 

Raw  milk  should  never  be  given  to  any  puppies,  always  boil  or  scald 


BREEDING  ~~'  1    ~r     <233 

it.     Under  the  heading  of  "Worms,"  you  can  now  find  proper  treatment  for 
puppies. 

The  following  article  on  "Parturition,"  and  a  valuable  one  indeed — ■ 
coming  from  the  pen  of  Dr.  A.  J.  Sewell,  the  celebrated  English  dog  veter- 
inarian, was  lately  published  in  the  American  Stock-Keeper,  and  I  herewith 
reproduce  it: 

"So  little  practical  knowledge  on  this  subject  is  abroad  in  our  kennels, 
judging  from  the  large  number  of  dams  and  puppies  that  have  been  annu- 
ally lost,  that  it  is  important  when  we  come  across  such  articles  as  Mr.  A.  J. 
Sewell's,  the  noted  English  dog  'Vet.,'  on  the  above  subject,  that  others  than 
the  readers  of  the  English  Kennel  Gazette  should  be  allowed  an  opportunity 
to  read  them.  From  such  hints  the  intelligent  Kennel  man  may  prepare 
himself  to  meet  emergencies  which  can  not  be  foreseen,  and  which  often 
happen  when  a  'vet's'  services  are  not  immediately  available.  The  follow- 
ing will  meet  such  cases:  "  'It  occasionally  happens  in  cases  of  head  pre- 
sentation that  the  hind  legs  are  bent  forward  on  the  body,  which  renders  the 
delivery  difficult,  and  without  the  passage  is  large  and  the  pains  are  very 
strong,  the  bitch  cannot  bring  the  pup  without  assistance.  This  is  best 
rendered  by  grasping  the  puppy  across  the  hips  with  a  small  pair  of  thin- 
bladed  parturition  forceps,  and  by  gently  pulling  at  the  puppy  during  each 
throe. 

"  'It  frequently  occurs  that  though  a  puppy  may  lie  in  a  normal  position 
the  mother  is  unable  to  give  birth  to  it,  in  consequence  of  its  being  too 
large.  The  nose  may  be  just  inside  the  vagina,  and  there  become  fixed  in 
spite  of  the  bitch  straining  for  hours.  I  have  seen  hundreds  of  such  cases. 
It  is  a  mistake  to  leave  these  cases  too  long,  thinking  they  will  come  all 
right,  as  it  is  wasting  time  and  the  mother's  strength;  and  if  there  are 
other  puppies  to  some  she  probably  will  not  have  strength  either  to  expel 
them  herself,  or  help  anyone  who  may  try  to  assist  her. 

"'In  these  instances  the  head  is  so  firmly  fixed  in  the  mouth  of  the 
womb  that  it  is  impossible  to  take  hold  of  it  with  forceps,  however  small 
or  thin  the  blades  may  be,  but  the  hook  of  the  crochet  may  generally  be 
passed  into  the  mouth  of  the  puppy,  and  by  fixing  it  well  into  the  pallet  a 
good  hold  may  be  obtained,  and  the  puppy  drawn  through  the  passage  by 
main  force.  If  care  be  taken  it  is  astonishing  what  amount  of  force  may 
be  used  in  promoting  delivery  without  at  all  injuring  the  bitch,  but  it  is 
best  not  to  pull  on  the  puppy  except  during  the  labor  pains,  if  there  are  any. 

"  'It  is  the  custom  of  some  veterinary  surgeons  to  give  the  ditch  during 
labor  a  hot  bath  if  the  parts  are  not  considered  sufficiently  relaxed  or  if 
the  pains  are  dull;  at  the  proper  time  the  tissues  always  do  become  prop- 
erly and  sufficiently  dilated,  providing  that  parts  are  in  a  normal  state — 
that  is,  bar  a  stricture  in  the  vagina  or  something  of  that  kind — and  if 
there  is  any  abnormal  condition  a  warm  bath,  in  my  opinion,  does  more 
harm  than  good,  by  often  checking  the  pains. 

"  'Sometimes  when  ergot  fails  to  induce  or  stimulate  the  throe — (here 
is  where  I  mucJi  prefer  to  use  the  Fellows'  Compound  Syrup  of  Hypo- 
phosphate) — I  irave  applied  with  advantage  to  the  abdomen  an  ice  bag;-  but 
what  I  fteid  the  best  of  all  when  one  or  two  subcutaneous  injections  of  ergo- 
tine  have  not  worked  satisfactorily,  is  to  put  the  bitch  in  some  vehicle  and 
give  her  a  drive,  and  if  nothing  else  will  induce  the  labor  pains  this  will 
do  so  in  most  cases. 

"  'The  worst  cases  are  those  which  when  the  bitch  is  due  to  pup  and 
the  parts  become  relaxed,  there  are  no  labor  pains  to  expel  the  fceta.  Ex- 
amined per  vaginum  no  puppy  can  be  felt  and  no  amount  of  excitement  of 
the  parts  by  passing  a  cold  instrument  into  the  passage  or  injection  of 
ergot  will  cause  contraction  of  the  womb.  If  the  patient  seems  all  right 
it  is  best  to  wait  some  hours,  during  which  time  everything  should  be  done 
to  try  and  excite  contraction  of  the  parts.  If  the  means  taken  do  not 
succeed,  then  there  is  nothing  to  be  done  except  the  Csesarean  operation, 
as  it  is  not  safe  to  attempt  delivery  with  forceps  or  crochet  when  the  pup- 
pies cannot  be  felt  with  the  finger.' 

"Then  follows  a  description  of  the  Csesarean  operation,  which,  of  course, 


334  BREEDING 

no  one  but  an  experienced  veterinary  surgeon  should  be  allowed  to  perform; 
so  it  is  not  necessary  to  give  it  here. 

"Prolapsus  or  inversion  of  the  womb  or  uterus  into  the  vagina  some- 
times, but  very  rarely,  occurs  during  parturition,  due  to  very  severe  strain- 
ing, or  as  the  result  of  too  much  force  being  used  to  remove  a  puppy  with 
forceps  or  by  other  artificial  means.  Care  must  be  taken  in  these  cases 
not  to  mistake  protrusion  of  the  uterus  with  prolapsus  of  the  vagina,  or  a 
polypus.  The  latter  may  be  recognized  as  a  solid  pear-shaped  body  with 
a  narrow  neck,  whilst  a  prolapsed  vagina  is  generally  a  large  solid  oval 
body  which  almost  fills  the  vaginal  canal  if  it  does  not  protrude  externally; 
it  has  a  broad  base  and  rises  at  the  back  part  of  the  passage  just  behind 
the  meatus  or  opening  of  the  bladder.  The  uterus  is  soft,  reducible,  and 
rough  and  tubular  in  shape,  besides  showing  dark-colored  patches  where 
the  placentae  have  been  attached. 

"After  the  womb  has  been  cleansed  by  being  sponged  with  a  weak, 
tepid  solution  of  Condy's  Fluid  or  permanganate  of  potash,  it  should,  if 
possible,  be  returned  by  gentle  pressure  on  the  fundus  of  the  uterus  with  a 
piece  of  whalebone  with  the  point  covered  with  sponge;  the  returning  is 
assisted  if  the  hind  legs  are  raised  in  part  by  the  bitch  being  held  upside 
down.  Care  must  be  taken  not  to  use  undue  force  or  the  uterus  may  be 
ruptured.  After  the  return  it  is  a  good  plan  to  inject  a  quantity  of  cold 
water  into  the  vagina  to  act  as  an  astringent. 

"When  the  protruding  uterus  shows  signs  of  having  been  injured  or 
is  much  congested,  or  decomposition  has  set  in,  amputation  is  advisable. 
This  is  best  done  by  drawing  the  part  gently  out  and  applying  a  strong  lig- 
ature as  high  up  as  possible  and  cutting  off  the  free  portion." 

In  the  June  number  of  the  Kennel  Gazette  (Eng.)  Mr.  Sewell  takes  up 
the  care  of  the  mother  and  puppies,  and,  judging  from  the  serious  losses 
which  occur  in  almost  every  kennel  from  carelessness,  or  worse,  kennel 
managers  cannot  read  the  following  too  carefully,  and  even  the  veterans 
may  gain  a  wrinkle  or  two: 

"When  the  bitch  has  finished  pupping  she  should  be  made  comfortable 
by  renewing  her  bedding  and  given  some  warm  milk.  As  to  the  bedding, 
there  is  nothing  better  than  straw,  laid  straight  across  the  box  and  changed 
daily.  I  do  not  like  mats  or  cloths  even  for  small  dogs  in  these  cases,  for 
they  become  so  quickly  foul.  When  the  bitch  has  had  a  large  litter  or 
has  had  a  bad  time,  it  is  a  good  plan  to  give  the  yolk  of  an  egg,  beaten  up 
with  milk  and  a  little  brandy;  or,  if  the  bitch  is  inclined  to  vomit,  some  beef 
tea  or  Bovine — a  small  quantity  every  hour.  This  may  even  be  occasionally 
given  before  the  bitch  has  finished  having  all  her  puppies,  if  she  appears 
very  exhausted.  A  few  hours  later  in  ordinary  cases,  when  all  is  going 
well,  some  thin  oatmeal  gruel,  which  is  the  best  food  for  the  next  two  or 
three  days,  may  be  given.  When  the  bitch  seems  disinclined  to  take  suf- 
ficient milk  gruel,  sheep's  head'  broth,  thickened  with  fine  oatmeal,  may 
be  ordered,  and  even  bread  and  milk  or  gravy.  After  the  third  day,  more 
.solid  food  may  be  given,  as  crushed  biscuit  or  boiled  rice,  with  sheep's  head 
broth  and  .the  meat  from  the  bones  added;  also  a  little  fish,  and  if  the 
bitiJh  is  not  feeding  well,  milk  may  be  given  to  drink  instead  of  water.  As 
time  goes  on,  especially  when  there  is  a  large  litter,  more  nourishment  is 
required,  and  the  food  must  be  increased  by  degrees  so  that  the  bitch 
is  kept  in  fairly  good  condition,  though  of  course  not  made  fat,  or  the 
secretion  of  milk  may  be  checked  and  the  puppies  will  suffer. 

Some  bitches  are  so  zealous  in  their  care  of  the  puppies,  more  espe- 
cially at  first,  that  their  health  suffers  in  consequence.  In  such  cases  the 
dam  must  be  made  to  go  out  to  relieve  herself,  particularly  the  bladder.  I 
have  seen  very  severe  cases  of  illness  caused  by  the  mother  not  leaving  her 
puppies,  and  in  two  instances  death  was  the  result  of  the  bladder  becom- 
ing over-distended  and  not  being  emptied.  The  condition  of  the  bowels 
also  sometimes  requires  attention,  but,  as  a  rule,  when  the  bitch  has  been 
allowed  to  follow  her  natural  desires  and  she  has  eaten  the  foetal  mem- 
branes, the  bowels  are  often  relaxed  in  the  course  of  a  day  or  two,  and  so 
long  as  it  is  not  severe,  no  notice  may  be  taken  of  it,  but  when  there  is 


^t  BREEDING  235 

much  purging  it  is  a  good  plan  to  give  a  small  dose  of  castor  oil  to  carry 
it  off  and  if  after  this  has  worked  off,  very  loose  motions  continue  and 
are  frequently  passed,  some  carbonate  of  bismuth,  from  five  to  fifteen 
grains  shaken  dry  on  the  tongue,  may  be  given  three  or  four  times  a  day. 
In  these  cases  the  milk,  or  broth,  should  be  thickened  with  arrowroot  in- 
stead of  oatmeal  so  long  as  the  bowels  continue  troublesome. 

After  pupping,  a  bitch  naturally  has  a  great  deal  of  discharge  from 
the  womb,  which  continues,  as  a  rule,  for  about  a  fortnight,  sometimes  a 
good  deal  longer.  I  find  it  a  good  plan  when  the  last  puppy  is  born  to 
syringe  the  uterus  out  with  a  tepid  solution  of  permanganate  of  potash. 
When  the  discharge  is  very  copious  and  offensive,  it  is  a  good  plan  to  repeat 
the  syringing  every  day  for  the  first  week;  and  the  coat  surrounding  the 
passage,  when  the  bitch  does  not  keep  herself  clean,  should  be  washed  oc- 
casionally with  warm  water  and  carbolic  soap  and  afterwards  carefully 
dried.  —   *««« 

When  the  discharge  from  the  passage  continues  after  three  weeks, 
astringent  injections  are  necessary,  as  a  teaspoonful  of  powdered  burnt  alum 
dissolved  in  a  pint  of  tepid  water  and  repeated  morning  and  evening. 

Occasionally,  after  the  usual  discharge  has  ceased,  a  bitch  will  have 
a  blood-like  discharge,  the  same  as  is  seen  in  bitches  when  in  oestrum,  and 
this  may  continue  for  weeks.  It  is  due  to  a  relaxed  condition  of  the  parts, 
and  when  very  profuse  the  bitch  becomes  much  emaciated  and  weakened. 
The  alum  injection  should  be  given  and  from  two  to  five  drops  of  witch 
hazel  bark,  administered  three  times  a  day  in  a  little  water.  When  this 
does  not  stop  the  discharge,  ergotine,  from  cne-half  to  two  grains,  made 
into  a  pill,  may  be  given  twice  a  day. 

The  mammary  or  milk  glands  often  require  attention,  more  especially 
if  all,  or  nearly  ail,  the  puppies  die.  Then  the  milk,  which  often  accumu- 
lates in  quantities,  becomes,  as  it  were,  caseated,  the  glands  are  swollen, 
inflamed  and  very  tender  and  abscesses  may  form.  The  same  thing  some- 
times occurs  when  the  bitch  has  a  large  litter,  in  one  or  more  glands,  the 
puppies  seeming  to  take  a  dislike  to  the  milk  in  these  parts;  or  perhaps  the 
parts  are  tender  and  the  bitch  refuses  to  let  the  puppies  suck  there.  Many 
bitches  who  have  never  been  in  pup,  or  even  served  by  a  dog,  often  have 
a  large  accumulation  of  milk  about  nine  weeks  after  being  in  heat,  and 
unless  the  parts  are  carefully  watched  to  see  the  glands  do  not  become 
swollen  and  hard,  a  good  deal  of  trouble  may  follow,  and  subsequently 
gradular  tumors  form,   necessitating  an   operation. 

When  the  glands  become  swollen  and  inflamed,  hot  water  fomentations 
should  be  applied  three  or  four  times  a  day,  and  after  each  fomentation 
the  glands,  especially  the  hard  lumps,  should  be  rubbed  with  warm  cam- 
phorated oil,  and  the  milk  drawn  off.  Castor  oil  should  be  given  also 
every  three  or  four  days.  When  the  bitch  affected  is  rearing  uppies,  it  is 
necessary  to  wash  the  camphorated  oil  off  with  warm  water  and  soap  before 
she  is  allowed  to  return  to  the  little  ones. 

.  While  some  bitches  have  too  much  milk,  others  have  none  at  all; 
the  latter  conditions  may  only  continue  for  a  day  or  two,  but  sometimes 
it  i&  permanent,  and  though  the  mother  may  be  anxious  to  nurse  the  pup- 
pies, she  is  unable  to  do  so.  In  such  cases  treatment  is  of  little  use;  a 
diet  of  oatmeal  gruel  and  boiled  fish  may  be  tried,  and  is  occasionally 
successful.  In  other  instances  when  this  has  failed,  I  have  found  a  stim- 
ulating diet  of  lean  raw  meat  of  some  use. 

Bitches  of  a  nervous  disposition,  especially  those  of  the  smaller  breeds 
of  dogs,  are  occasionally  subject  to  convulsions  when  nursing  puppies. 
It  is  generally  put  down  to  weeakness,  but  I  do  not  think  this  is  the  cause, 
for  I  have  seen  these  attacks  occur  when  the  mother  has  been  in  good 
condition  and  when   only  rearing  two  or  three  puppies. 

The  complaint  is  called  parturient  eclampsia,  and  though  the  symptoms 
are  very  distressing,  it  is  very  seldom  that  death  occurs  as  a  result.  The 
only  signs  are  restlessness  and  excitement,  the  bitch  keeps  leaving  her 
puppies  and  walks  about  panting.  Presently  she  falls  over  on  her  side, 
the  whole  body  being  convulsed,  looking  very  much  like  an  animal  which 


236  BREEDING  

has  been  poisoned  with  strychnine.  The  legs  are  stretched-  out  and  rigid, 
the  tail  is  often  curled  tightly  over  the  back  and  the  head  is  drawn  back. 
The  mouth  is  generally  kept  wide  open,  the  dog  panting  violently,  but 
there  is  no  loss  of  consciousness. 

With  respect  to  treatment,  it  is  seldom  medicine  can  be  given  by  the 
mouth  in  these  cases,  but  when  it  is  possible,  a  large  dose  of  bromide  of 
potassium — say  one  scruple  for  a  bitch  the  size  of  a  fox  terrier,  in  a  table- 
spoonful  of  water,  should  be  given.  Great  care  must  be  used  in  giving 
the  liquid,  or  the  patient  will  be  choked.  The  bromide  may  be  repeated 
in  an  hour.  When  it  is  impossible  to  give  the  medicine  by  the  mouth,  an 
enema,  containing  hydrated  chloral  should  be  used.  The  dose  for  a  dog 
the  size  of  a  fox  terrier,  in  an  urgent  case  like  this,  should  be  half  a  dram 
dissolved  in  about  four  tablespoonfuls  of  warm  water  and  given  when  tepid. 

Smaller  dogs — say  spaniels  and  Yorkshire  terriers — may  have  a  scru- 
ple of  chloral  dissolved,  of  course  in  less  water.  When  the  attack  has 
passed  off,  to  prevent  a  recurence  it  is  advisable  to  give  a  course  of  bromide 
— say  from  three  to  five  grains  for  dogs  the  size  of  toy  spaniels  and  fox 
terriers  in  a  little  water  three  or  four  times  a  day,  and  feed  on.  a  light 
diet,  as  bread  and  milk,  or  the  latter  thickened  with  Genger's  food. 

If  the  convulsions  do  return  the  puppies  ought  to  be  weaned  and 
means  taken  to  disperse  the  milk.  Trouble  sometimes  occurs  in  doing  this 
even  when  the  puppies  have  been  gradually  weaned,  and  such  is  particu- 
larly the  case  when  bitches  have  milk  without  having  puppies.  Aperient 
medicines  should  always  be  given,  castor  oil  being  the  best.  A  full  dose 
should  be  administered  about  every  four  days.  The  glands  should  be  rub- 
bed twice  a  day  with  camphorated  spirits,  or  the  balsam  of  Peru  ointment. 
What  suits  one  dog  does  not  always  suit  another,  therefore  when  the  milk 
does  not  seem  to  be  dispersing  as  quickly  as  it  should,  other  external  rem- 
edies may  be  tried,  as  rubbing  the  glands  with  whisky  or  brandy,  or  even 
eau-de-cologne,  and  I  have  often  had  good  success  by  dabbing  the  glands 
frequently  with   the   following  simple  lotion   applied   cold : 

Recipe. — Methylated  spirits  (wood  alcohol)  one  ounce;  cold  water  eight 
ounces. 

The  milk,  unless  it  is  secreted  in  very  large  quantitiesV-'and  is  caus- 
ing pain,  or  is  becoming  hard,  should  not  be  drawn  off,  as  to  do  so  only 
stimulates  the  secretion.  Sometimes  these  cases  are  extreme-ly  obstinate 
and  will  last  five  or  six  weeks,  or  even  longer.  In  such  Iiista'ricies,  iodide  of 
soda  is  useful  in  closes  from  half  to  two  grains,  according  to  the  size  of 
the  bitch,  given  in  a  little  water,  and  repeated  twice  daily;  •  The  diet  in 
these  cases  should  be  light  and  of  a  stimulating  character,  as  bread  and 
milk,   dry  biscuits,  milk  pudding,  etc." 

One  never  knows  when  some  untoward  circumstance  will  arise  in 
parturition.  Pups  come  the  wrong  way,  are  too  large,,  or  something  or  other 
happens  that  nonplusses  even  the  best  of  us  sometimes. 

A  bitch  should  be  made  to  come  out  to  empty,  herself,  if  only  for  a 
few  moments  on  the  first  day,  or  if  she  whelps  at  night,  then  on  the  next 
day,  as  many  bitches  through  strong  maternal  instinct,  love  for  their  pup- 
pies, and  through  fear  that  some  harm  may  befall  her  children,  will  often 
"hold  in"  and  damage  result  from  no  relief  to  the  kidneys  or  stomach. 

The  following  is  copied  from  the  American  Field,  and-is  valuable  on 
this  subject: 

"Bitches  at  such  times  often  become  a  little  distressed,  when  their 
labor  is  at  hand,  and  will  crawl  or  creep  into  any  hole  or  corner  in  order 
to  seek  relief,  and  will  sometimes  whelp  in  the  most  unsuitable  places — ■ 
on  a  cold  floor,  for  instance.  The  bench  should  be  protected  on  all  sides, 
so  that  the  puppies  are  not  subject  to  the  danger  of  being  thrown  "over- 
board," and  the  bench  should  not  be  too  large,  for  fear  of  the  puppies 
getting  pushed  away  from  their  dam  and  getting  cold,  before  they  are 
properly  dry.     Dry,  clean  wheat  straw  makes  the  best  bedding. 

"The  latter  contingency  is  one  that  frequently  happens.  While  the 
earlier  puppies  are  yet  moist  they  are  pushed  away  from  their  dam  in 
her   efforts   to   give   birth   to    succeeding   puppies,    cold    strikes   into    their 


KEEP   YOUR   DOG  IN  HEALTH 

by   the    use   of   the 

Common  Sense 

Remedies 

The  C.  S.  R.  REMEDIES  have  been  used  by  many  of  the  leading 
kennels  for  the  past  twenty-five  years,  and  are  free  from  all  poisonous 
ingredients,  such  as  arsenic,  strychnine,  areca  nut,  santonine,  or  any- 
thing injurious  to  the  stomach.    The  list  includes: 

C.  S.  R.  Skin  Remedy,   Complete  Treatment $1.00 

C.   S.  R.   Distemper    Preventative,    Capsules 50c 

C.  S.  R.  Worm  Remedy,  Liquid  or  Capsules 50c 

C.  S.  R.  Good  Health  Capsules,  Regulator 50c 

C.   S.  R.  Mange  Ointment  for  all  Skin  Eruptions 50c 

C.   S.  R.   Tonic  Pill  and   Blood   Purifier 50c 

C.  S.  R.  Distemper  Remedy,  Powders  or  Capsules 50c 

C.  S.  R.  Sanitary  Dog  Brush    50c 

C.  S.  R.  Sanitary  Soap    (3  Cakes) 50C 

(15c.  per  cake.     20c.  by  mail.) 

VETOL    TABLETS  $1.50 

A  specific  for  bringing  around   the   dam  and   strengthening 

the  stud  dog.  Used  with  wonderful  success  by  our  leading 
kennels. 

All  sent  prepaid  on  receipt  of  price.  The  entire  list  put  up  in  large 
boxes  at  special  rates  for  kennels  and  dealers. 

MANUFACTURED  BY  THE 

Common  Sense  Remedp  Co* 

14-16  CHURCH  STREET  NEW  YORK  CITY 


238  BREEDING 

tender  little  system,  they  gradually  lose  the  vigor  which  Nature  has  given 
them  to  aid  them  in  securing  the  dam's  teats,  and  drawing  from  them 
their  natural  sustenance,  they  whine,  and  gradually  pine  away  and  die, 
to  the  consternation  and  dismay  of  an  anxious  and  expectant  owner. 

"Some  breeders,  in  order  to  avert  the  possibility  of  what  we  have 
just  described,  take  away  the  puppies  as  they  are  born  into  a  kitchen, 
saddle  room  or  other  place,  in  which  there  is  a  fire  to  dry  them,  putting 
them  back  when  the  bitch  has  either  finished  whelping,  or  at  intervals  of 
rest  from  her  labor. 

"A  bitch,  shortly  before  she  is  due  to  whelp  and  afterward,  should  be 
kept  upon  sloppy  food  rather,  such  as  porridge  and  milk,  bread  and  milk, 
hound  meal  soaked  in  sheep's  head  broth,  etc.  While  whelping  she  should 
simply  be  given  some  warm  milk.  The  bitch  should  be  allowed  out  Tor 
a  short  run  of  a  few  minutes  on  the  second  day,  the  duration  of  which 
may  be  increased  each  day. 

"The  secret  of  success  in  rearing  puppies  is  fresh  air,  pure  water, 
free  and  unrestrained  exercise,  good  food,  given  often  and  a  little  at  a 
time,  access  to  grass,  and  a  dry,  warm  bed  at  night.  The  fewer  puppies 
are  kept  in  kennels  the  better,  and  the  more  the  foregoing  table  of  hygiene 
can  be  observed  the  better  will  puppies  come  on." 

Especially  should  the  puppy  quarters  be  kept  sweet  and  clean,  for 
a  dozen  flies  will  take  more  out  of  suckling  puppies  than  a  night's  rest 
will  put  back.  Here  is  where  a  cool  cellar  or  other  darkened  building  will 
be  found  almost  imperative  when  the  mercury  is  trying  to  do  a  century. 
The  brooding  quarters  should  be  kept  cool  and  in  semi-gloom,  and  more 
than  ordinary  attention  should  be  paid  to  cleanliness  of  the  bedding  so  as 
not  to  attract  flies.  Next  to  worms  there  is  nothing  more  irritating  and 
calculated  to  retard  a  puppy's  well  doing  than  flies. 


DOG  PAPERS  YOU  NEED 


There  are  several  published  devoted  to  dogs.  (I  take  them  all),  and 
even  if  you  only  own  one  dog,  it  will  be  of  great  benefit  to  you  to  read  these 
dog  journals: 

"Field  and  Fancy,"  (weekly),  you  can't  well  do  without. 

"American  Fancier,"  edited  by  Harry  W.  Lacy,  comes  out  fifty-two  times 
a  year,  and  as  a  fearless  writer  is  not  surpassed  by  any  one. 

"Dogdom,"  a  handsomely  gotten  up  monthly  magazine,  profusely  il- 
lustrated, is  the  best  dollar  investment  a  dog  owner  can  make. 

Then  there  is  "The  Dog  Fancier,"  another  monthly,  published  for  many 
years  by  Eugene  Glass,  Battle  Creek,  Mich.,  full  of  dog  news,  and  costs 
only  a  dollar. 

"The  American  Field,  (weekly),  the  oldest  dog  paper  of  all,  their 
specialty  is  hunting  dogs,  and  if  you  are  interested  in  sporting  dogs,  you 
can't  afford  to  not  get  this  paper. 

A  new  monthly,  "Dog  "World,"  handsomely  gotten  up  and  very  read- 
able, costs  only  a  dollar  a  year. 

"Hounds  and  Hunting,"  devoted  to  Beagles  and  Hounds,  is  just  the 
paper  for  anyone  interested  in  these  breeds,  to  read. 

All  these  papers  have  advertisements  in  the  book,  but  if  you  prefer 
you  can  remit  the  subscription  price  to  me,  and  I  will  see  that  you  get 
the  paper. 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  239 


USEFUL  INFORMATION    REGARDING  DOGS 


Buying  Dogs. — In  buying  a  dog,  first  be  sure  that  you  are  dealing  with 
some  recognized  breeder  who  will  not  send  a  dog  C.  O.  D.,  and  you  will  al- 
ways get  a  dog  just  as  represented.  No  legitimate  breeder  or  dealer  can 
afford  to  act  any  way  but  fair  and  square  with  you,  as  it  would  get  him 
into  serious  trouble  with  the  American  Kennel  Club,  and  for  wrong  doing 
he  would  be  punished  and  disqualified,  which  means  that  he  could  not 
exhibit  any  of  his  dogs  at  any  Bench  Show  held  under  their  rules,  nor 
could  he  register  any  of  his  dogs  in  their  stud  book  while  disqualified.  So 
you  can  see  how  safe  you  are  in  buying  a  dog  and  sending  your  money  on 
in  advance,  if  you  are  sure  first  that  you  are  dealing  with  a  breeder  of 
note  and  reputation,  as  you  are  protected  by  the  American  Kennel  Club 
of    New    York. 

Very  few  legitimate  breeders  will  ship  a  dog  C.  O.  D.  for  many  good 
and  sufficient  reasons.  It  is  harder  on  the  dog,  as  coming  collect,  he  ne- 
cessarily has  to  go  through  a  lot  of  red  tape  business,  and  this  delays  his 
delivery  in  most  every  instance,  going  from  train  to  uptown  city  office,  a 
delay  here  of  course  to  check  up  and  fix  way  bills,  books,  etc.,  and  gen- 
erally then  delivered  after  all  this  delay  by  another  wagon. 

Select  a  good  breeder  to  buy  from  and  write  him  for  a  full  description 
in  detail  as  to  all  points  of  the  dog  and  its  price,  then  send  him  a  money 
order  or  draft  for  the  dog  with  orders  to  ship  on  the  guarantee  that  the  dog 

is  to  be  exactly  as  described  and  represented.     Now,  when  you  get  him 

after  he  feels  at  home,  recovered  from  his  trip,  and  acts  and  looks  himself 
— then  compare  dog  with  description  you  have  had,  and  my  word  for  it 
your  dog  will  fill  the  bill. 

If  dissatisfied  for  any  cause  don't  be  hasty  about  returning  him,  but 
wait  a  day  or  two,  give  the  dog  a  chance  to  rest  up,  taking  good  care  of  him 
meanwhile,  and  then  write  to  the  dealer,  and  he  can,  and  will,  no  doubt, 
straighten  the  matter  up  so  that  you  are  satisfied.  Unless  the  buyer  is  a 
judge  of  the  breed  ordered  (which  the  seller  is),  it  might  happen  that 
as  good  or  even  a  better  specimen  had  been  sent  than  was  promised, 
and  yet  not  come  up  to  the  expectations  of  the  buyer  according  to  his 
erroneous  ideas,  or,  it  didn't  "look  like  Mr.  So-and-So's  dog,"  etc.,  and 
here  is  the  chance  for  the  seller  to  explain  and  put  you  right,  as  to  what 
constitutes  a  good  and  correct  specimen,  which  is  really  what  you  want, 
only  you  don't  know  it.  These  are  rare  cases,  of  course,  the  exception 
and  not  the  rule.  Bench  shows  are  educating  people  on  dogs,  and  a  good 
many  could  now  fairly  judge  the  dog  they  had  ordered. 

Always  go  to  headquarters  to  buy  anything,  and  here  I  want  to  say 
a  few  words  as  to  buying  a  dog  from  bird  stores.  They  are,  as  a  rule, 
a  poor  place  to  buy  a  dog — a  much  better  place  to  buy  a  bird  or  bird  seed! 

Being  only  dealers  and  only  having  a  scant  general  idea  of  dogs,  the 
dealer  may  be  honest  enough,  yet  deceive  his  customer  as  to  a  dog,  simply 
because  the  seller  fooled  him  when  he  bought  the  dog  to  sell  again.  This 
is  often  the  case  in  a  bird  store  buying  a  litter  of  puppies.  They  look  cute 
as  puppies,  but  often  turn  out  to  be  curs  when  grown  up,  because  the 
mother  of  them  had  a  mishap,  got  out,  and  was  bred  to  some  outside  dog 
of  another  breed,  so  the  owner  packs  them  up  in  a  basket  and  sells  them 
for  almost  any  price  to  the  bird  store.     He  puts  them  in  his  window  at  a 

price  lower  than  the  genuine  article  could  be  sold  for;   people  see  them 

they  look  cute — you  buy  one,  thinking  you  got  a  great  bargain.  You  raise 
this  puppy  and,  of  course,  become  attached  to  it,  but  gradually  it  develops 


24<|  USEFUL  INFORMATION   REGARDING  DOGS. 

into  a  common  cur,  and  you  are  competed  to  apollogize  for  your  pet  when 
your  friends  visit  you.  "Silk  is  never  sold  for  the  price  of  calico.  All 
fine  bred  animals  cost  more  because  they  are  harder  to  raise.  Always  be 
willing  to  pay  a  fair  priee  for  a  good  one.  Buy  of  legitimate  breeders  and 
you'll  get  the  worth  of  your  money. 

Receiving  Dogs. — If  you  buy  a  dog  that  comae  to  you  by  express  and 
has  had  a  long  trip,  having  left  his  home  to  come  to  a  new  one  and  among 
strangers,  and  he  at  first  should  act  scared,  shy  or  sulky,  and,  of  course, 
then  not  look  his  best,  don't  conclude  that  the  dog  is  not  as  he  was  repre- 
sented by  the  seller,  and  that  you  have  been  fooled,  but  speak  to  him 
kindly  pet  him,  and  it  won't  be  long  till  he  will  see  that  be  has  found 
a  friend  mi  his  new  master,  and  while,  no  doubt,  he  may  think  of  the 
home  and  friends  he  has  left,  and  very  often  silently  grieve  for  them,  yet 
he  will  Quickly  learn  to  love  the  new  master,  and  show  by  his  actions 
how  happy  he  is  in  his  new  home.  When  thus  at  his  ease  and  recovered 
from  the  strain  and  excitement  of  the  trip,  he  will  act  and  look  himself 
aeain  and  now  is  the  time  to  judge  him  and  see  if  he  is  not  as  repre- 
sented, which  he  will  prove  to  be,  I  think,  especially  if  he  was  purchased 
from  a  reliable  breeder. 

When  you  take  the  dog  out  of  his  crate,  unless  he  has  a  collar  on 
and  vou  at  first  hold  him  by  this  or  his  chain,  the  best  plan  is  to  take  him 
out  of  the  box  in  a  yard  or  room,  for  he  might  be  badly  frightened  under 
the  circumstances  and  get  away  from  you.  Also  see  the  first  thing  that  his 
collar  is  tight  enough,  so  no  danger  of  his  slipping  it  over  his  head  if 
scared    and  getting  away  perhaps. 

Very  many  dogs  I  receive  for  shows  have  a  collar  on  so  loose  that,  if 
from  fright  or  any  undue  cause,  they  could  easily  slip  it  off  and  escape. 
Don't  have  it  so  tHght  that  it  chokes,  but  just  so  you  can  run  your  finger 
around  under  it  is  right— and  safe.  While  for  many  years  I  have  been 
a  orofessional  handler  of  dogs  at  bench  shows,  having  at  some  shows  as 
manv  as  seventy  dogs  of  all  breeds  to  receive  and  care  for  during  the  week, 
and  the  greater  part  of  them  being  strange  to  me,  this  being  our  first  in- 
troduction I  never  had  any  trouble,  and  not  a  dog  in  the  many  I  have  thus 
handled  for  others  but  was  just  as  good  a  friend  of  mine,  and  quickly, 
too    as  were  my  own  favorites  that  I  had  brought  from  my  kennels.     . 

'  After  receiving  a  dog,  gife  him  a  chance  in  the  yard  to  attend  to 
nature's  calls,  which  he  will  very  likely  want  to  do,  and  you  watch,  to 
kpp  the  condition  of  his  bowels.  He  may  be  either  constipated  or  vice  versa, 
Either  due  to  having  "held  in"  for  too  long  a  trip  in  his  box.  Very  many 
matured  dogs  will  not  "empty"  in  a  box  on  a  trip,  and  herein  lies  the 
greatest  danger  of  long  trips  by  express  when  they  do  not  empty  in  box, 
the  verv  natural  result  being  either  inflammation  of  the  bowels  or  kidneys 
-—either  or  both.  If  dog  is  bound  up,  the  feces  being  voided  with  a  hard 
pffort  and  it  is  dry  and  very  hard,  give  the  dog  a  dose  of  castor  and  olive 
oil  mixed  If  bowels  are  too  loose,  passage  running  from  dog  too  freely 
and  very  thin  attend  to  this,  as  treated  under  its  heading,  but  such  cases 
eenerally  yield  to  proper  feeding  for  a  day  or  so  with  foods  to  fit  the  case. 
A  nuppy  will  often  stand  a  long  trip  (if  fed  and  watered  en  route)  better 
than  an  adult  dog,  because  the  pups  will  attend  to  nature's  calls  en  route, 
which  is  all  the  better  even  if  it  arrives  soiled  from  so  doing — almost  cer- 
tain to  be  so,  confined  in  a  box. 

Receiving  Puppies. — Many  people  who  buy  puppies  do  not  give  them 
nrooer  care  on  their  arrival  in  the  new  home.  In  order  to  insure  success 
with  a  puppy  take  it  carefully  from  the  crate  in  which  it  is  received,  mak- 
ine  as  little  noise  as  possible  in  so  doing.  Speak  to  it  in  a  pleasant  and 
svmnathetic  way,  calling  it  by  its  name,  if  it  has  any,  which  fact  should 
alwavs  be  ascertained  before  receipt  of  the  puppy  from  the  seller,  if  possi- 
hle  After  removal  from  the  crate,  be  careful  that  the  puppy  does  not 
eet  frightened  and  run  off  and  hide.  In  order  to  avoid  this,  let  the 
vounester  out  into  a  space  of  moderate  size  at  first.  Bear  In  mind 
that  the  journey,  however  short,  has  had  the  tendency  to  frighten  and  make 
nervous  any  young  dog.  .  


can  *  c.  S.  R.  Blue  Book 

Specialties 


BREEDERS  CALENDAR  AND 
DATE  BOOK 

Price  50  cents. 

STANDARDS  OF  THE  BREEDS 

Illustrated  with  champion  dogs  of  each  Dreed  \ 
Gives  the  authentic  standard  of  the  breeds  \ 
recognized  by  the  American  Kennel  Club.  i      Price  $1.00 

CLUB  AND  KENNEL  DIRECTORY 

The  principal  happenings  of  the  Year  in  Dog- 

dom. — Field  Trial  Winners  and  Their  Owners. 

— The     Judges,     Secretaries,     Superintendents, 

Veterinarians   of  the  A.   K.   C.   Shows   for   the        f 

Year.      Directory  of  the   Leading    Kennels    of 

America.  i        Price  $1.00 

POPULAR  HAND  BOOKS  OF  THE  DAY 

Common  Sense  Treatise  on  Distemper,  includ- 
ing Special  Articles  of  Interest  to  Pekingese 
Spaniel  Fanciers.  Price  25  cents. 

BOSTON  TERRIER  STANDARD  SIMPLIFIED 

Revised  and  brought  down  to  date- — covering 
the  new  standard  adopted  by  the  Club.  Hand- 
somely illustrated.  Price  5o  cents 

COLLIE  STANDARD  SIMPLIFIED 

Including  special  article  on  the  leading  strains 
of  Collies,  and  history  of  the  Collie  Clubs  of 
America,  (profusely  illustrated). 

AIREDALE  STANDARD  SIMPLIFIED 

A  wonderful  book  on  this  wonderful  dog.  An- 
alizes  the  standard  and  tells  just  how  to  pick 
out  a  good  dog.  The  principal  strains  of  Aire- 
dales and  why  you  should  breed  to  them.  (Pro- 
fusely illustrated). 

THE  GREAT  DANE  STANDARD 

A  careful  analization  of  this  big  breed  and  telling 
the  good  and  bad  points  and  how  to  select  your 
stock  for  breeding.     (Profusely  illustrated). 

Send  for  Circulars. 

Common  Sense  Remedp  Co. 

P,  O.  BOX  1028  NEW  YORK  CITY 


Price  50  cents 


Price  50  cents 


Price  50  cents 


242  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

After  allowing  the  puppy  some  freedom  and  an  outing  in  an  enclos- 
ure, for  sufficient  length  of  time  for  it  to  attend  to  nature's  calls,  give  it 
a  bowl  of  boiled  milk  and  bread  broken  up,  or  a  soft-boiled  egg  or  two. 
Feed  light  for  a  few  days,  at  morning,  noon  and  night.  If  kept  out  of 
draughts  and  petted,  the  puppy  should  soon  get  fully  accustomed  to  his  new 
home,  and  the  sooner  it  is  made  to  feel  at  home  by  kindness  and  attention 
the  better  it  will  thrive  and  grow,  and  the  less  will  it  feel  the  shock  of  the 
change  to  its  new   quarters. 

Remember  that  while  it  may,  and  probably  did,  start  clean,  it  may  reach 
you  soiled,  due  to  getting  in  its  own  filth  in  box,  so  this  must  be  con- 
sidered, and  you  remember  that  a  bath,  if  only  a  sponging  off,  if  in  win- 
ter, and  on  their  very  thorough  drying,  will  soon  very  much  improve  its 
appearance.  Before  you  buy  a  pup,  or  even  an  adult  dog,  find  out  from 
its  seller  if  it  has  been  thoroughly  and  successfully  treated  for  worms, 
and  if  not,  attend  to  this  promptly — (See  Worms).  Very  few  breeders, 
however,  nowadays,  but  do  treat  all  their  puppies  for  worms  before  sell- 
ing or  shipping — which  they  should  do.  The  dog  you  receive  may  bowl  or 
cry  the  first  night  in  his  new  home,  don't  be  surprised  if  it  does  (you  might 
do  the  same  under  the  same  circumstances),  but  put  up  with  this — the  dog 
is  worth  all  the  trouble  or  interruption  it  might  cause  you — and  kindness 
will  soon  cure  it  of  this. 

Females  as  Pets. — In  selecting  a  dog  for  a  pet,  the  erroneous  idea 
seems  to  prevail  to  a  great  extent  of  always  getting  a  male.  Here  is  where 
you  often  make  a  mistake,  for  if  you  have  only  one  dog,  a  female  is  pref- 
erable in  many  respects.  In  the  first  place,  a  female  is  more  affectionate, 
or  shows  it  more  than  a  male,  is  cleaner  about  the  house,  more  obedient,  and 
less  liable  to  run  away.  The  objection  to  a  female  seems  to  be  that  she 
will  come  in  season;  so  she  will,  but  this  only  happens  once  in  every  five 
to  seven  months,  and  then  till  again  in  season  you  have  no  trouble.  A 
male  dog  is  always  "in  season,"  and  should  there  be  a  female  that  is  in 
season,  even  a  mile  away,  he  will  find  it  out,  and,  unless  chained  up,  or 
gates  of  your  yard  watched  very  closely,  your  dog  is  gone,  and  then  you 
find  out  what  he  discovered  long  before  you  did.  Perhaps  he'll  find  his 
way  home  again,  but  the  chances  are  much  against  it,  and  you'll  now  have 
the  chance  to  offer  a  reward  for  the  return  of  your  dog. 

Perhaps  you'll  get  him  back,  and  perhaps  you  won't.  If,  when  your 
female  comes  in  season,  you  don't  care  to  have  her  around,  you  send  her 
to  some  kennel  to  board  for  a  couple  of  weeks  (as  many  do  with  me),  and 
thus  save  yourself,  for  a  trifling  cost  all  this  annoyance.  There  must  be 
females  or  there  wouldn't  be  any  dogs  at  all.  When  a  female  first  shows 
signs,  if  you  will  make  note  of  the  first  day,  you'll  discover  a  bleeding, 
which  will  continue  for  from  eight  to  ten  days,  a  swelling  of  the  vagina 
with  it.  This  bleeding  and  swelling  will  begin  to  subside  at  from  ten  to 
twelve  days,  and  then  is  when  she  is  ready  for  breeding.  You  can't  watch 
her  too  closely,  for  they  are  very  cute  and  cunning,  at  such  times,  and  will 
often  fool  you  by  slipping  out,  and  then  when  ready,  the  first  dog  they 
meet  is  the  favored  one.  Such  mistakes  as  this,  due  to  carelessness,  is  what 
produces  so  many  curs  that  we  see  on  the  streets  of  every  town  or  city. 
While  I  love  any  dog,  yet  I  love  best  a  thoroughbred.  The  cur  may  be  as 
smart  and  as  true  and  faithful  as  the  pure  bred  one,  but  there  should  be 
no  curs,  and  would  not  be  if  people  were  more  careful  at  such  times. 

In  case  your  female  should  get  out,  and  served  by  some  dog  on  the 
streets,  and  you  desire  to  get  rid  of  the  puppies,  do  so  as  soon  as  they  are 
born.  Drowning  is  then  the  best  way  to  do  it.  Take  one  pup  at  a  time  and 
hold  it  in  a  pail  of  water  till  dead,  or,  you  can  put  the  whole  litter  in  a 
pail  of  water,  putting  a  weight  or  stone  on  top  of  a  cover  that  will  hold 
it  down  to  the  water.  To  guard  against  danger  of  a  caked  breast  in  the 
mother,  it  may  be  advisable  to  allow  one  pup  to  live  and  nurse  for  a  week; 
harder  on  the  pup  to  be  then  drowned,  however. 

Another  instant  death  is  a  teaspoonful  of  Scheele's  Prussic  Acid  for 
matured  dogs.  In  giving  it  hold  mouth  open  and  upwards,  pouring  the  li- 
puid  well  back  on  the  tongue.     Great  care  is  necessary  in  handling  such  a 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  243 

potent  drug,  as  it  would  be  dangerous  to  human  life  if  spilled  over  a  cut 
or  wound. 

Shipping  Dogs  by  Express. — This  is  a  very  important  matter,  and  the 
greatest  precautions  must  be  taken  and  care  exercised  unless  you  are  so 
heartless  as  to  not  care  how  much  cruelty  and  hardship  the  dog  endures, 
especially  on  a  trip  of  over  twelve  hours  unless  properly  crated,  watered 
and  fed,  and  a  day  and  night  trip  is  just  so  much  harder.  If  it  is  a  grown 
dog,  an  adult,  food  for  twenty-four  hours  they  can  do  without,  and  no  harm, 
but  in  case  of  a  young  puppy,  it  must  have  food  at  least  twice  a  day  even 
if  only  for  a  day  or  night  trip.  This  you  can  arrange  for  by  sending  food  in 
a  bag  tied  onto  the  box  and  a  large,  prominent  request  on  box,  "Please 
Feed  Morning  and  Night — Food  in  Bag."  If  an  adult  dog,  and  trip  is  a 
day  and  night  only,  then  drop  a  big  bone  or  two  in  box  for  it  to  gnaw  on, 
or  a  few  dog  cakes.  Fasten  tin  pan  or  cup  inside  in  one  corner,  up  a  few 
inches  from  floor  for  water  and  a  big  request  on  box,  "Please  Water  Often," 
especially  if  in  hot  weather.  Now,  as  to  longer  trips  than  twenty-four  hours, 
extra  attention  must  be  given.  My  plan  is  as  follows:  I  first  go  to  my  ex- 
press agent,  have  him  look  up  best  time  to  start  dog  for  best  trip  and  as 
to  connections.  Then  if  trip  is  to  be  two  days  or  longer,  I  get  him  to 
write  on  ahead  at  least  twenty-four  hours  to  the  agents  at  any  stations 
where  dog  has  a  "lay  over"  of  an  hour  or  longer,  asking  this  agent  to 
there  take  out  the  dog  on  chain  to  attend  to  nature's  calls,  also  to  feed 
and  water.  I  find  no  difficulty  in  getting  such  favors  shown  by  asking  my 
agent,  and  you  can  no  doubt  do  the  same  from  your  agent,  whom  you  pro- 
bably know  or  he  knows  you.  To  have  dog  taken  out  you  must  have  a 
door  so  they  can  do  as  requested.  By  arranging  this  way,  your  dog  is 
reasonably  assured  of  some  comfort  added  to  his  long  and  hard  trip.  The 
greatest  danger  of  these  long  trips  are  from  inflammation  of  the  kidneys  or 
bowels,  due  to  not  emptying,  and  this  almost  always  the  result  if  a  dog 
"holds  in"  for  over  twenty-four  hours,  which  is  even  too  long  for  safety. 
Now  as  to  the  box,  which  must  be  made  right.  If  dog  is  to  go  in  fall  or 
winter,  or  any  season  subject  to  quick  changes,  unless  you  have  a  good,  reg- 
ular dog  crate.  Several  now  made  for  dogs.  (See  LeGalle  Bros',  adv.  in 
this  book),  then  make  your  box  the  height  of  the  dog  at  his  shoulder,  as 
long  as  his  body  and  head  and  just  wide  enough  so  he  can  turn  around  by 
bending  his  body,  and  he  will  be  comfortable,  as  a  box  too  large  is  just  as 
bad.  Make  it  open  on  the  sides  and  top  for  air,  but  have  the  lower  half 
of  each  side  and  end  tightly  closed  so  that  the  dog  when  lying  down  is 
not  exposed  to  draught,  as  they  are  often  kept  outside  in  a  depot  open  at 
ends,  on  a  truck,  and  thus  right  in  a  draught,  and  having  come  from  a 
warm  car,  the  natural  result  would  be  a  cold  or  perhaps  pneumonia.  I 
always  have  request  sent  on  ahead,  on  a  winter  trip,  to  "please  keep 
inside  where  warm  at  any  lay  overs,"  and  this  you  can  have  done  also. 

Give  him  plenty  of  straw  in  his  box  if  in  winter.  Make  box  on  top 
like  the  roof  of  a  house  so  that  there  is  no  danger  of  his  being  smothered 
as  he  could  be  perhaps  if  box  was  square,  by  express  messenger  putting 
him  in  a  corner  and  another  box  or  trunk  on  the  top  and  sides  of  his  box, 
thus  depriving  him  of  air.  Make  box  so  there  is  no  danger  of  this  hap- 
pening. Fasten  by  nailing  inside  box,  in  one  corner,  a  tin  cup  or  pan,  about 
right  distance  up,  then  spend  a  nickel  for  aother  tin  cup  and  fasten  this 
one  on  the  outside  of  his  box  by  a  string  or  wire,  so  that  there  is  no  ex- 
cuse for  the  express  messenger  not  doing  what  all  shippers  pay  express 
companies  double  rates  for  doing — caring  for  dogs  en  route.  Express  cars 
seldom  have  any  water  in  them  (the  messenger  himself  when  thirsty  going 
back  to  the  next  coach  for  his  drink),  and  this  tin  cup  tied  on  outside 
and  a  written  request  tacked  on  box,  "Please  water  often,"  leaves  it  easy 
for  him  to  bring  the  dog  a  drink,  the  facilities  being  handy.  Did  you  ever 
notice  how  often  in  traveling  in  hot  weather  you  will  visit  the  water  cooler? 

Never  Start  a  Dog  on  a  Full  Stomach;  the  motion  of  the  car  would 
very  likely  make  him  sick  and  cause  him  to  throw  up  what  he  had  eaten, 
soiling  his  box  and  himself  as  well. 

The  night  you  are  to  ship  dog  give  him  a  fair  meal  that  afternoon, 


$44  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

and  an  hour  before  he  is  to  leave  take  him  out  for  a  walk  of  a  half  dozen 
blocks  or  more,  and  he  will  be  sure  to  attend  to  nature's  calls.  If  you 
start  dog  on  a  morning  train,  get  up  early  enough  that  morning  to  attend 
to  this  before  he  leaves.  Then  offer  him  a  drink  before  he  starts  and  thus 
he  leaves  with  an  empty  stomach  and  will  have  a  much  more  comfortable 
trip  than  if  he  started  after  having  had  a  full  meal.  Many  house-broken 
dogs  will  "hold  in"  and  will  not  do  anything  in  their  traveling  box,  which 
will  cause  inflammation  of  the  bowels  or  kidneys.  Better  for  the  dog  if  it 
did  break  the  rule  for  this  time.  Puppies  of  course  are  not  so  systematic 
and  generally  get  through  better  if  suitably  crated. 

Now  make  a  prominent  sign  like  this  and  tack  it  on  top  of  box: 

AN   "OPEN   LETTER"    FROM   A   DOG. 

Mr.  Messenger — My  name  is   I  am  on  a  hard,  long  trip, 

and  can  only  get  through  with  your  assistance  and  kind  care,  for  which  I 
will  thank  you  in  my  way.  I  will  not  bite  you!  Confinement  in  this 
box  is  bad  enough — but  I  do  need  a  drink  and  a  bite  to  eat. 

Some  express  messengers  are,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  afraid  of  dogs,  but 
by  furnishing  them  the  name  of  dog,  when  they  speak  to  him  he — the  dog 
■ — will  think  he  has  found  a  friend,  probably  wag  his  tail  and  give  an  as- 
surance by  his  looks  to  the  messenger  that  he  is  all  right,  and  thus  secure 
better  care  and  some  kind  words  from  the  messenger  and  add  to  the  dog's 
comfort  on  the  trip, 

Always  crate  a  dog,  never  ship  him  on  chain  for  several  good  reasons. 
Crating  is  safer,  cleaner,  and  more  comfortable  for  the  dog.  On  chain  he 
takes  too  many  chances.  He  may  slip  his  collar  and  jump  out  of  the  car 
door,  or  in  a  crowded  car  a  trunk  or  box  might  fall  on  and  injure  him,  and 
besides,  the  express  company's  charge  for  any  dog  on  chain  is  not  less  than 
a  hundred  pounds,  even  if  it  was  only  a  twenty-pound  dog. 

Always  notify  by  previous  mail  or  by  wire  the  party  who  is  to  get  the 
dog,  so  that  he  may  know  when  to  look  for  him  and  meet  the  dog  at  depot, 
thus  shortening  his  trip  a  bit  and  avoiding  the  delay  caused  by  the  dog 
being  taken  first  to  city  express  office,  laying  there  awhile  and  then  drove 
around  to  the  house  he  is  directed  to. 

Don't  ship  a  3x1  dog  in  a  3x1  crate.  You  like  to  stretch  yourself 
sometimes.  Neither  should  you  ship  it  in  a  box  far  too  large.  A  dog  in 
such  a  box  will  often  receive  a  nasty  knock  in  being  handled  none  too 
gently  by  the  messenger;  if  you  do,  besides,  you  or  the  other  fellow  will 
have  to  pay  useless  express  charges. 

Dogs  Chained  Up. — I  do  not  believe  in  chaining  dogs  up  in  a  yard,  but 
if  you  want  him  chained  at  night  don't  make  it  too  short — and  he  must 
have  freedom  during  the  day.  To  keep  a  dog  chained  constantly  day  and 
night  is  cruel  and  inhuman,  and  will  make  any  dog  cross.  Dogs  are  not 
born  cross — you  never  saw  a  cross  puppy — and  when  you  see  a  cross  dog 
some  human  being — man,  woman  or  some  good-for-nothing  boy — is  to 
blame  for  it,  not  the  dog.  There  would  be  no  cross  dogs  if  people  were 
not  the  cause  of  it  by  their  ill  treatment  of  the  dog  any  more  than  there 
would  be  a  balky  horse  only  for  men — fools  and  brutes — who  make  balky 
horses. 

If  you  must  chain  the  dog  up  during  the  day,  then  give  him  his  lib- 
erty at  night.  It  is  not  necessary  to  chain  him  up  if  you  have  a  yard  with 
a  fence  high  enough  and  gate  securely  fastened.  Many  a  bad  boy  will 
delight  to  tease  your  dog  simply  because  he  sees  he  is  chained  up — for  the 
boy  would  be  afraid  to  if  the  dog  was  loose — and  this  teasing  makes  a  cross 
dog.     I  don't  blame  the  dog,  but  I  do  the  boy. 

If  you  have  no  yard  fenced  in  and  a  large  dog  and  must  keep  it  on 
chain  part  of  the  time,  allow  at  least  20  feet  of  chain.  Fancy  the  misery 
of  a  man  full  of  life  and  energy  trying  to  take  exercise  by  pulling  and 
■training  against  a  chain  three  or  four  feet  long.     Yet  this  is  the  length 


STERLING  COLLIE  KENNELS 


(REGISTERED) 

STERLING  IN  NAME  AND  QUALITY 


<3 


UJ 

H 
I  (A 


(5 


ill 


INTERNATIONAL  CHAMPION  PARBOLD  PICAROON 

EDWIN   L.  PICKHARDT,  Prop. 


210  UNIVERSITY  HALL, 


MADISON,  WISCONSIN. 


246  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING   DOGS. 

which  some  otherwise  humane  people  seem  to  think  a  just  allowance  for 
the  yard  dog.  The  chain  should  be  fastened  to  a  stake  about  18  feet  from 
the  kennel. 

Should  there  be  no  enclosure  for  your  dog  to  romp  in  and  must 
therefore  be  tied  up  to  prevent  loafing,  straying,  or  getting  coaxed  away 
and  stolen,  then  proceed  thus  in  securing  and  still  enable  him  to  move 
about  tolerably  freely:  Get  a  strong  wire,  ten  to  forty  feet  long,  slip  a 
ring  on  it,  fasten  wire  at  each  end  to  stout  stake,  drive  the  stakes  at  full 
stretch  of  wire  into  ground  to  below  the  surface.  Hook  the  dog's  chain 
to  ring  running  freely  on  the  wire,  and  your  dog  can  run  up  and  down 
this  course  at  will.  By  attaching  such  a  wire  to  the  side  of  a  long  wall  or 
house,  a  runway  can  be  provided  in  similar  manner.  The  kennel  can  be 
placed  a  few  feet  beyond  the  end  of  long  wire  so  that  the  dog  can  get  to 
and  into  it  without  needing  to  be  changed. 

Yards  for  Dogs. — If  you  have  a  dog  you  should  also  have  a  yard  fenced 
in.  No  one  living  in  a  city  should  keep  a  dog  unless  they  have  the  yard, 
except  in  a  case  of  a  small  toy  dog,  that  you  keep  in  the  house  or  a  flat, 
and  in  such  cases  you  must  take  your  dog  out  for  a  walk  night  and  morn- 
ing. No  dogs,  even  the  smallest  toy,  can  live  right  and  be  healthy  if 
they  live  indoors  and  on  carpets  all  their  life.  They  must  get  their  feet 
on  mother  earth  and  a  chance  at  grass.  I  pity  any  dog  that'  has  to  live  in 
a  parlor  or  a  bedroom  all  his  life — for  he  is  in  prison,  perhaps  an  elegant 
prison,  but  yet  it  is  a  prison  and  the  dog  is  leading  an  unnatural  life  and 
a  limited  one.  A  friend  of  mine  who  is  worth  many  thousands  of  dollars 
to  my  cents  lives  in  an  elegant  mansion  in  Cincinniti,  surrounded  by  large 
grounds  and  handsome  lawns,  but  to  be  fashionable  and  his  place  to  look 
to  correspond  with  his  fashionable  neighbors,  he  has  no  fence  around  it. 
He  owned  a  very  fine  St.  Bernard  and  a  few  days  ago  the  electric  car  in 
front  of  his  house  killed  his  dog.  Now,  if  he  had  had  a  fence  his  dog  would 
be  living.  Your  neighbor  may  have  a  fine  lawn — and  no  fence — and  your 
dog  has  no  right  to  trespass  on  his  grounds  and  destroy  his  flowers.  This 
neighbor  may  be  one  of  those  unfortunate  persons  who  have  something 
lacking  in  their  general  make-up,  and  does  not  love  dogs  (and  for  this  he 
is  to  be  pitied),  and  your  dog  coming  into  his  yard  and  committing  a 
nuisance  or  damaging  his  flowers  causes  him  to  some  night  "drop  a  but- 
ton" where  your  dog  gets  it  and  then  your  dog  dies.  If  you  had  had  a 
fence  and  kept  your  dog  where  he  belonged,  your  to-be-pitied  neighbor 
(because  he  does  not  love  dogs)  would  not  have  done  so  and  your  dog 
would  still  be  living.  If  you  have  a  fine  lawn  in  front  and  must  keep  up 
the  style  of  the  neighborhood,  then  at  least  do  the  next  best  thing,  viz., 
fence  off  a  good-sized  yard  in  rear  of  your  house  for  the  dog.  This  is 
better  and  safer  than  no  yard  at  all  and  will  do  all  right  if  large  enough, 
but  then  take  the  dog  out  for  a  walk  once  a  day  at  least,  which  will  add 
to  his  health  and  happiness.  Dogs  have  rights,  and  many  of  them,  but 
your  dog  has  no  right  to  become  a  nuisance  to  your  neighbor,  and  he  won't 
if  properly  kept  and  cared  for  on  your  own  premises.  The  fence  should  be 
so  high  that  there  is  no  danger  of  the  dog  jumping  it,  and  your  gates  should 
be  made  self-closing,  as  your  servants  or  a  caller  may  leave  the  gate  open, 
and  in  this  way  your  dog  will  live  and  stay  where  he  belongs  and  has  a 
right  to,  and  can't  trespass  or  get 'himself  or  his  owner  into  trouble. 

I  am  sorry  to  say  that  there  are  some  people  in  this  enlightened  age 
who  do  not  like  dogs.  I  pity  all  such,  and  should  you  contemplate  moving 
into  another  neighborhood,  before  you  close  the  deal  for  the  house  first  find 
out  if  your  neighbors  on  both  sides  love  dogs — if  not,  don't  rent  this  house, 
but  find  one  where  you  will  have  better  neighbors  who  do  love  dogs,  for 
these  you  can  trust  and  the  others  you  could  not.  If  you  are  living  beside 
people  who  do  not  love  dogs — watch  them  closely. 

The  only  safe  plan  in  such  a  case  is  to  get  up  and  take  a  look  all  over 
your  yard  carefully  each  morning  before  you  let  your  dog  out,  for  you 
might  find  a  piece  of  "fixed"  meat  or  a  piece  of  sponge  that  had  been  dipped 
in  grease  which,  if  tae  dog  picked  up  and  swallowed,  would  cause  a  very 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  247 

painful  death.  Also,  be  very  careful  yourself  and  never  throw  a  cork  that 
would   cause  his   death  as  well. 

Always    have   a   collar   on   your   dog,    locked,    and    tight   enough   so    it 
can't  be  slipped  over  his  head,  and  on  it  something  reading  like  this: 

ROVER, 
Owned  by  Jno.  Smith,  220  Main  St.,  Cincinnati. 

So  that  if  he  does  stray  away  the  chances  are  more  in  his  favor  of  being  re- 
turned to  you,  for  he  may  fall  into  the  hands  of  a  man  who  loves  dogs,  and 
therefore  an  honest  man,  who  would  return  him  to  you. 

Yard  Kennels. — If  you  have  a  large  dog  and  prefer  him  to  sleep  in 
your  yard,  provide  a  suitable  and  comfortable  dog  house  for  him,  a  shelter 
and  proper  protection  in  wet  and  cold  weather,  properly  ventilated  at  the 
top,  so  that  he  does  not  sleep  in  a  draught.  The  size  you  can  determine 
easy  enough.  Have  feet  on  it  so  that  it  stands  several  inches  off  the 
ground,  and  make  the  floor  double  with  tar  paper  between  floors.  Small 
wheels  on  it  in  place  of  feet  are  best,  as  this  will  enable  you  to  move 
it  to  different  locations,  so  if  it  is  damp  weather  you  can  place  it  in  a 
part  of  the  yard  that  will  be  dry.  Watch  out  for  dampness,  wUich  causes 
rheumatism.  Cellars  or  basements,  unless  you  are  certain  they  are  not 
damp,  are  a  dangerous  place  for  a  dog  to  sleep.  As  to  bedding — in  hot 
weather  the  bare  floor  is  the  one  the  dog  will  prefer  as  most  comfortable. 
Pine  shavings  are  a  good  bedding  for  medium  weather  in  spring  and  fall,  as 
no  fleas  can  live  in  them.  In  winter  straw  is  the  best,  and  don't  be  stingy 
with  it;  give  him  plenty,  so  he  can  make  a  hole  and  cuddle  up  in  it  and  keep 
warm.     This  should  be  changed  at  least  three  times  a  week. 

Dogs  Barking  or  Howling. — Your  dog  has,  however,  no  right  to  bark 
or  howl  at  night  and  annoy  your  neighbors — unless  he  is  barking  at  some 
intruder  and  notifying  you  of  danger.  If  he  gets  into  the  habit  of  barking 
at  night  he  must  be  broken  of  this,  which  can  be  done,  and  in  a  night  or 
two.  Slip  quickly  and  quietly  to  his  kennel,  catch  him  in  the  act,  have 
your  whip  handy,  and  give  him  a  whipping  for  barking — scold  him  and 
tell  him  he  must  keep  quiet.     He'll  soon  understand  what  you  mean. 

A  dog  has  certain  inalienable  rights,  among  which  are  those  of  life, 
liberty  and  the  pursuit  of  happiness,  subject,  however,  as  the  rights  of  hu- 
man beings  are,  to  the  exercise  of  liberty  without  derogation  to  the  com- 
fort of  others. 

Dogs  in  Your  House. — If  you  have  only  one  or  two  dogs,  your  own 
house  is  none  too  good  or  suitable  a  place  for  them  to  sleep  at  night,  and 
their  access  to  the  house  during  the  day  is  all  right,  for  a  thoroughly  well 
behaved  dog  is  a  most  desirable  companion  to  have  around  for  company, 
and  especially  at  night,  for  any  dog  is  liable  to  prove  of  great  value  or 
assistance  in  case  of  burglars  or  unwelcome  visitors.  This  applies  to  the 
large  breeds  as  well  as  toy  dogs,  for  they  would  all  be  watchful  and  give 
the  alarm  to  prevent  harm  befalling  their  master  and  mistress.  All  dogs 
are  faithful  to  some  one.  How  often  do  we  read  or  hear  of  lives  having 
been  saved  by  the  house  dog. 

If  you  have  a  toy  dog  that  sleeps  in  the  house,  provide  it  a  box  or 
basket  so  that  in  cold  weather  you  can  cover  it  up  at  night.  Putting  it  to 
sleep  on  a  chair  or  soft  does  well  enough  in  summer,  but  suppose  you  do 
this  in  winter,  and  you  cover  it  up  with  a  shawl  and  it  goes  to  sleep — say 
in  a  warm  room,  this  is  all  right,  so  far.  Now  suppose  the  fire  goes 
out  towards  morning,  your  pet  turns  over  and  "kicks  the  cover  off,"  the 
room  gets  cold,  and  the  result  is  that  your  dog  catches  cold,  which,  if  not 
attended  to  promptly,  is  liable  to  be  a  sick  dog.  Provide  a  box  or  basket 
so  that  you  can  cover  it  over  the  top,  allowing  for  air,  and  he  will  be  safer 
and  more  comfortable.  Aside  from  this,  he  is  more  liable  to  be  clean  in 
his  habits,  and  will  wait  till  he  is  let  out  into  the  yard  in  the  morning.  Very 
few  dogs  will  commit  a  nuisance  in  their  sleeping  box. 

And  again — suppose  he  is  unlucky  enough  to  get  fleas  on  him,  and  this 
often  happens  to  a  dog  by  having  met  a  dog  that  did  have  them,  you  will 


248  USEFUL   INFORMATION   REGARDING  DOGS. 

find  It  much  easier  to  rid  him  of  them  than  if  he  had  been  sleeping  on  a 
sola  or  loose  in  the  house,  for  you  could  take  his  bedding  out  and  clean  or 
burn  it.     To  get  rid  of  fleas  is  given  under  that  heading. 

-  House-Breaking  Puppies. — When  you  buy  a  puppy  and  get  it  home, 
don't  expect  it  to  be  house-broken,  and  you'll  not  be  disappointed.  It's  too 
young  to  know  just  what  it  ought  to  do,  and  you  must  give  it  time,  a  chance, 
and  properly  educate  it  yourself.  Thi3  can  be  done  with  every  puppy,  or 
grown  dog  either,  but  you  can't  do  it  in  a  few  hours,  for  it  requires  time 
and    patience. 

You  may  have  bought  it  as  "house-broke,"  and  it  may  be  that  it  was 
— for  the  home  it  has  just  left — but  needs  re-breaking  to  a  certain  extent 
for  its  new  home,  which  will  then  not  be  nearly  so  hard  to  accomplish. 

Now,  when  your  puppy  makes  a  mistake,  if  it  is  old  enough  to 
punish,  eateh  it  in  the  act;  rub  his  nose  in  it,  switch  it,  and  run  it  out  in 
the  yard,  weather  permitting  (for  you  wouldn't,  of  course,  put  it  out  in 
the  rain  or  snow).  Repeat  this  every  time  it  does  wrong,  and  it  can  soon 
be  taught  to  be  clean  in  its  habits.  Never  punish  any  puppy  (or  dog)  ex- 
cept at  the  time  of  the  wrong-doing,  so  that  it  knows  wnat  it  is  being 
punished  for.  By  running  it  out  of  doors  every  time,  it  soon  gets  to  un- 
derstand that  there  is  the  place  to  attend  to  nature's  calls.  Have  pa- 
tience, and  it  won't  be  very  long  till  you  have  a  well  behaved  dog.  Some  are 
much  easier  to  break  than  others.  I  don't  advocate  too  much  or  severe 
whipping,  as  in  some  cases  it  will  cow  the  dog,  and  if  so  will  take  a 
long  time  to  get  it  over  this.  Most  pupies  at  two  months  old  will  under- 
stand that  they  have  done  wrong  by  the  punishment.  As  it  gets  older 
make  it  a  point  to  put  it  out  the  last  thing  at  night  and  the  first  thing 
in  the  morning,  and  give  it  frequent  yard  opporunities  during  the  day. 
Use  judgment  and  forbearance  as  well,  and  reason  with  and  talk  to  it — 
they  soon  get  to  understand.  If  weather  is  bad,  at  night  or  in  the  morning, 
for  that  time  put  it  in  the  cellar  or  some  covered  outhouse  or  shed. 

If  you  have  a  female  and  raise  a  litter  of  puppies  at  home,  here  is  a 
good  plan  that  I  follow  in  the  kennel,  and  when  I  sell  a  puppy  two  or 
three  months  old,  it  is  already  "kennel  broken,"  and  then  very  easy  to 
house-break  when  its  owner  gets  it  home.  I  have  stalls  made,  enclosed  by 
a  gate  and  in  front  of  the  box  or  part  of  the  stall  fitted  up  for  the  bitch  to 
whelp  in,  I  have  a  galvanized  iron  pan  to  fit  the  other  part  of  the  stall,  and 
this  pan  I  cover  over  the  bottom  with  sawdust  for  the  puppies  to  go  into 
as  soon  as  they  are  old  enough.  The  mother  cleans  up  alter  her  puppies 
till  they  are  four  or  five  weeks  old,  and  then  they  will  naturally  and  very 
quickly  get  into  the  habit  of  going  into  the  sawdust  when  nature  prompts 
them.  The  example  set  by  the  first  one  to  go  in  will  soon  be  followed  by 
its  brothers  and  sisters,  as  it  is  a  dog's  natural  inclination  to  hunt  a  place. 
You  can  follow  this  plan  when  your  bitch  has  puppies  by  simply  making 
a  low  wooden  box  with  a  sheet  of  tin  for  a  bottom  to  it,  which  will  answer 
for  one  litter  all  right  enough,  and  if  your  bitch  has  whelped  in  a  box  in 
your  house,  you  can  fix  up  a  little  fence  made  out  of  lathes  that  will  cost  but 
a  trifle,  and  answer  the  purpose  of  keeping  her  and  her  puppies  penned 
up.  Puppies  that  I  sell  as  "kennel  broke"  are  very  easy  to  house-break. 
Treat  all  your  puppies  for  worms  soon  after  they  are  weaned,  as  then  the 
worms  begin  to  be  dangerous.  In  some  cases  as  young  as  five  and  six  weeks  is 
necessary.  Worms  kill  more  dogs  than  all  other  diseases  combined;  but  this 
you  will  find  carefully  treated  and  remedies  given  under  the  heading  of 
"Worms"  in  another  part  of  this  book.  To  house-break  older  dogs,  follow 
the  same  plan,  only  a  little  more  severe. 

Shade  in  Kennel  Yards. — Fortunate  are  the  dogs  in  a  kennel  during 
torrid  weather,  if  well  provided  with  shade  trees.  Nothing  would  appear  to 
please  a  dog,  especially  a  terrier,  so  much  on  a  hot  day,  as  to  burrow  into  the 
cool  earth.  If  this  can  be  allowed  without  damage  to  property  by  all  means 
let  the  dogs  make  their  own  cool  earth  nests.  If  appropriate  shade  is  not  af- 
forded naturally  it  is  well  to  build  a  lean-to  or  a  square,  flat,  shed-like 
structure,  as  low  to  the  ground  as  the  height  of  the  dogs  will  allow.  They 
shquld  be  able  to  stand  up  under  it.    This  will  throw  a  shady  spot  at  all 


DOG DOM 


Is  the  leading  monthly  kennel  publication  In  America.  A  free  sample 
copy  will  convince  you  of  this  fact.  All  breeds  are  treated  alike  so 
if  you  are  interested  in  dogs  you  should  not  be  without  DOGDOM. 
Established  in  1900,  there  has  been  a  steady  growth  until  now  there 
are  more  than  THIRTY  THOUSAND  READERS  each  month. 

Such  well  known  authorities  as  Freeman  Lloyd,  A.  F.  Hochwalt, 
Dr.  O.  P.  Bennett,  Bert  Franklin,  D.  V.  M.,  Laurence  Tobin,  Edward 
Axtell  and  Dr.  F.  A.  Fisher  write  for  DOGDOM.  The  Question  Box, 
in  which  you  may  have  answered  any  questions  as  to  breeding,  dis- 
eases, etc.,  free  of  charge,  is  alone  worth  more  than  the  subscription 
price. 

The  Christmas  Supplement  to  DOGDOM  is  given  free  to  subscrib- 
ers with  the  regular  December  issue.  This  edition  is  printed  on  the 
highest  grade,  plate  paper,  and  contains  reviews  of  the  finest  dogs 
and  kennels  in  the  world. 

$1.00  A  YEAR  CANADIAN  AND  FOREIGN,  $1.25 

SAMPLE  COPIES  FREE 

As  an  advertising  medium  DOGDOM  Is  without  a  peer.  The 
amount  of  display  and  classified  advertising  carried  each  month  ex- 
ceeds that  of  any  other  dog  paper.  If  you  have  a  dog  to  sell  or  to 
offer  at  stud  send  at  once  for  a  DOGDOM  rate  card.  The  price  may  be 
higher,  but  the  results  will  more  than  warrant  any  extra  expenditure. 
It  will  prove  the  cheapest  advertising  in  the  long  run. 

DOGDOM  can  supply  any  book  about  dogs  published.  Send  for 
list. 


DOGDO 

F.  E.  BECHMANN,  PUBLISHER 
BATTLE  CREEK,  MICHIGAN. 


250  USEFUL  INFORMATION   REGARDING   DOGS. 

times  of  the  day  and  if  a  trench  is  dug  in  the  earth  on  a  line  with  the  edges 
of  the  roof  a  dry  spot  for  the  dogs  to  lie  in  when  it  rains  or  the  ground 
is  wet  will  be  afforded. 

Guide  as  to  Proper  Size  Doses  of  Medicine  for  Dogs. — In  many  cases 
your  druggist  or  family  physician  would  know  what  remedy  to  prescribe  for 
your  dog,  but  would  not  know  how  much  of  the  medicine  to  give  a  dog. 

Let  them  be  guided  by  the  following:  A  proper  sized  dose  of  medicine 
for  the  largest  breeds  of  dogs  may  be  given  the  same  as  if  for  a  man.  We 
will  take  the  St.  Bernard,  Great  Dane,  or  Mastiff,  as  requiring  a  dose  we 
will  call  one  part;  middle  sized  dogs  like  a  setter  or  pointer  can  be  given 
from  a  half  to  three-quarters  as  much  as  a  St.  Bernard,  while  a  dog  like  a 
fox  terrier,  a  third;  a  dog  the  size  of  a  pug,  a  quarter;  and  smaller  toy  dogs, 
from  one-eighth  to  a  twelfth  part. 

In  regard  to  age:  the  matured  dog,  one  part;  a  year  old,  three-quarters; 
six  to  nine  months,  half;  and  at  four  to  six  weeks,  one-eighth.  This  is 
Dalziel's  idea,  and  he  is  the  first  one  to  furnish  a  guide  that  I  know  of.  I 
have  had  doctors  bring  their  dogs  to  me  to  treat,  and  tell  me  that  they 
really  did  not  know  how  much  to  give  the  dog  of  the  remedy  that  they 
knew  was  required  in  the  case. 

Preparing  for  Shows. — The  preparation  of  dogs  for  shows  is  a  matter 
upon  which  we  are  often  asked  for  advice,  and  in  view  of  the  season  which 
will  soon  be  here  for  fall  and  winter  shows  a  few  lines  will  perhaps  be 
appreciated.  The  most  notable  feature  of  the  inquiries  made  about  this 
subject  lies  in  the  obvious  fact  that  the  aspirants  to  exhibition  fame  do  not 
realize  the  necessity  for  preparation  until  the  time  has  gone  by  for  doing 
any  real  good;  then  at  the  eleventh  hour  there  is  wild  excitement  about 
matters  that  ought  to  have  been  foreseen  and  arranged  weeks,  perhaps 
months — earlier.  A  dog  needs  to  be  put  through  some  sort  of  training  course 
just  as  an  athlete  does;  and  unless  he  is  initiated  into  the  proper  methods 
of  deportment  he  is  not  likely  to  find  favor  in  the  eyes  of  the  judges,  re- 
porters or  public.  To  some  extent  a  dog  intended  for  exhibition  is  public 
property,  and  the  public  who  pay  to  come  and  see  him  ought  to  have  him 
exhibited  to  them  in  the  best  condition  and  with  the  best  manners  possible, 
says  Our  Dogs. 

How  can  a  dog  be  taught  to  look  his  best?  Well,  chiefly  by  being  kept 
in  good  conditions  by  careful  dieting,  and  particularly  by  regular  exercise. 
Keep  his  blood  flowing  freely  through  his  veins — keep  him  alert — ready  for 
his  meals,  well-groomed  and  well  amused — for  dogs  like  amusement  as  much 
as  their  masters  do.  Do  not  let  him  get  into  "slack"  ways — keep  him  "up 
to  the  mark."  These  methods,  and  some  occasional  exercise  in  the  manoeu- 
vres of  the  show  ring,  will  have  an  excellent  effect.  Rehearse,  rehearse! 
There  is  nothing  like  plenty  of  rehearsal  to  make  a  show  run  smoothly.  Now, 
what  about  being  "proof  against  distemper?"  Is  not  that  a  large  order  to 
execute  all  at  once?  Who  is  going  to  make  a  dog  proof  against  the  great 
Fiend  that  waylays  the  race  of  dogs.  Several  things  may  be  done.  It  can  be 
ascertained  probably  whether  he  has  had  distemper.  There  is  no  surety  that 
he  will  not  have  it  again,  but  it  is  a  safeguard — experience  showing  that  it 
is  the  exception  for  a  dog  to  contract  the  disease  a  second  time — though 
many  dogs  do. 

Then,  bearing  in  mind  that  contagious  diseases  always  need  a  receptive 
condition  on  the  part  of  their  victim,  we  should  always  take  care  that  a  dog 
is  never  sent  to  a  show  if  he  seems  at  all  "below  par"  or  run  down.  Give  him 
beforehand  some  cooling  medicine  and  plenty  of  exercise.  One  of  the  great- 
est destroyers  of  disease  germs  is  oxygen — aerate  his  blood  therefore  with 
plenty  of  ozone — he  will  be  less  likely  to  contract  disease.  Disinfectants  are 
not  of  much  value  applied  to  the  coat;  we  should  trust  more  to  the  general 
condition  of  health  and  to  a  thorough  disinfection  on  returning  from  the 
show.  No  dog  with  a  cold  or  discharge  from  the  nostrils  or  running  at  the 
eyes  ought  to  be  sent  to  a  show;  at  a  good  show  no  doubt  such  a  condition 
would  be  noticed  at  the  veterinary  examination  and  the  dog  would  at  once 
be  refused  admission.    Stringent  rules  are  very  necessary  at  big  shows,  and  it 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  251 

is  not  always  possible  to  enforce  stringent  rules  without  injuring  some  sus- 
ceptibilities. 

The  first  three  points  surely  do  not  need  much  explanation — but  they  do 
need  emphasis.  Dogs  intended  for  show  must  be  so  fed  and  groomed  that 
they  are  in  full  condition  of  health,  but  not  gross;  and  their  skins  are  free 
from — we  will  not  say  mange,  which  is  a  product  of  filth,  but  from  eczema, 
a  blood  irritation  affecting  the  skin;  that  they  are  constantly  well-groomed 
fo  keep  their  coats  in  proper  order,  there  is  not  anything  as  good  for  a 
dog's  coat  as  regular  grooming;  that  have  no  trace  of  worms.  Worms  must 
be  sought  after  from  a  month  to  six  weeks  before  the  show  comes  on;  the 
more  or  less  drastic  treatment  necessary  to  dispossess  them  will  naturally 
reduce  the  animal  to  a  condition  not  up  to  show  standard;  and  as  one  dose 
is  never  enough  (really)  to  free  a  dog  from  worms  it  is  well  to  begin  in  time. 
Let  him  have  one  or  two  or  three  good  dosings,  well  in  advance  of  the  show- 
time, and  then  all  that  should  be  needed  afterward  is  an  occasional  mild 
aperient  pill  or  capsule  just  to  keep  the  pests  from  getting  a  lodgement  again. 

Age  of  Maturity. — The  larger  breeds  of  dogs,  like  St.  Bernards,  Mastiffs, 
Great  Danes,  or  Newfoundlands,  do  not  mature  until  two  years  of  age; 
setters  and  pointers  at  twelve  to  fifteen  months,  while  fox  terriers  and  dogs 
of  this  size,  and  including  smaller  breeds,  will,  as  a  rule,  mature  at  a  vear 
old. 

Determining  Age  of  Dogs. — Many  novices  will  appreciate  a  few  lines 
upon  the  subject  of  how  to  determine  the  age  of  a  dog.  Fortunately, 
there  is  not  the  amount  of  roguery  in  the  canine  fancy  as  there  is  in 
"horsey"  circles,  but  now  and  again  no  doubt  the  amateur  gets  "bitten." 
To  a  certain  extent  the  age  can  be  determined  by  examining  the  teeth. 
A  dog  of  mature  age  has  forty-two  teeth,  and  these  are  complete  in  num- 
ber at  the  age  of  about  eight  months.  This  clearly  indicates  the  age 
so  far,  but  after  that  there  is  no  method  so  certain,  and  a  good  deal  of 
judgment  is  needed.  As  a  rule  the  teeth  of  an  old  dog  will  be  dark  and 
lacking  in  the  pearly  look  of  a  young  animal's  teeth — but  even  this  must 
not  be  too  much  relied  upon,  as  cunning  dog  dealers  take  care  to  use  a 
tooth  brush  freely  if  such  be  necessary,  and,  moreover,  dogs'  teeth  vary 
a  great  deal,  as  ours  do. 

Generally  speaking,  the  age  of  a  dog  can  best  be  adjudged  by  a  combi- 
nation of  appearances.  Old  dogs  are  quiet  and  stolid,  whereas  youth  car- 
ries activity  with  it.  Moreover,  curious  as  it  may  sound,  grey  hairs  will 
tell  a  tale  in  dogs  as  well  as  in  our  own  case,  for  it  is  often  noticeable  that 
a  dog  has  become  gray  in  the  face  and  about  the  ears.  So  we  have  several 
points  to  judge  by,  i.  e.,  appearance  of  coat  as  regards  greyness;  general 
demeanor;  condition  of  teeth.  To  these  may  be  added  the  state  of  the 
claws,  which  in  some  breeds  are  curled  round  and  often  disposed  to  be 
sore  and  festering.  Finally,  we  may  suggest  as  good  advice  that  the 
opinion  of  an  expert  be  taken  in  any  case  of  doubt.  The  novice  should 
never  purchase  a  dog  at  a  show  or  upon  any  such  sudden  inspiration  with- 
out being  guided  by  a  competent  adviser. 

Treatment  of  Field  Dogs. — During  the  season  when  sportsmen  pass 
bench  shows  and  put  their  dogs  in  trim  for  the  pursuit  of  Bob  White, 
sporting  dogs  need  to  be  dealt  with  at  this  season,  because  there  are  cer- 
tain ailments  which  affect  them  in  a  greater  degree  than  other  clogs;  and 
a  knowledge  of  how  to  properly  treat  cases  of  sickness  among  field  dogs 
is,  of  course,  very  essential,  unless  they  are  to  be  entirely  incapacitated. 

In  the  first  place,  it  is  most  essential  that  when  a  dog  has  been  at 
work  in  the  field  he  shall  be  attended  to  at  once  on  his  return  home  at 
night.  The  dog  should  be  thoroughly  groomed;  if  wet  let  him  be  rubbed 
dry  with  a  rough  towel.  So  many  careless  gamekeepers  allow  dogs  to 
come  in  wet  from  the  field  and  send  them  to  kennel  without  any  attention 
■ — the  result  is  that  they  get  either  rheumatic  or  asthmatical.  Another 
important  thing  is  to  examine  the  feet  and  ears  with  a  view  to  the  removal 
of  all  thorns  and  other  foreign  substances  which  are  likely  to  set  up  in- 
flammation, and  then  will  incapacitate  the  animal  for  some  days  at  least. 
It  it  should  be  found  on  examination  that  the  feet  are  sore  and  inflamed, 


252  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

they  should  be  bathed  in  tepid  water,  and  afterward  with  advantage  may 
be  sprinkled  with  powdered  Fuller's  earth,  which  is  very  absorbent  and 
cooling  as  wejl. 

As  we  said  above,  rheumatism  is  another  common  ailment  affecting 
dogs  which  have  been  neglected  after  exposure  to  bad  weather.  Rheu- 
matism occurs  either  in  the  hindquarters  or  in  the  front  limbs,  and  when 
it  takes  the  latter  form  it  is  known  as  "kennel  lameness."  This  again  is 
an  ailment  which  will  recur  from  time  to  time  under  unfavorable  condi- 
tions. It  can  best  be  dealt  with  by  the  use  of  a  good  strong  liniment  or 
embrocation — such,  for  instance,  as  a  mixture  of  equal  parts  of  turpentine 
and  soap  liniment,  which  is  very  searching,  especially  if  a  little  hartshorn 
be  added.  The  dog  should  also  have  some  internal  medicine,  and  the  most 
effective  remedy  for  rheumatic  troubles  is  salicylate  of  soda.  The  dog 
must  also  be  carefully  dieted,  care  being  taken  not  to  overfeed  him  during 
the  prevalence  of  the  attack.  In  this  case,  again,  it  is  to  be  borne  in 
mind  that  one  attack  is  likely  to  be  followed  by  others  upon  the  least  pro- 
vocation, and  special  care  should  therefore  be  given  to  deal  with  a  trouble  as 
soon  as  it  appears.      (See  article  on  Rheumatism). 

Dogs  in  the  field  are  liable  now  and  again  to  take  up  poisoned  meat, 
which,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  it  is  contrary  to  the  law  of  the  land  to 
•  place  it  about,  is  very  often  laid  about  with  the  object  of  destroying  rats.  A 
dog  should  never  be  allowed  to  eat  meat  or  anything  of  that  kind  that 
he  picks  up  in  the  field  if  he  can  possibly  be  prevented  from  doing  so. 
The  commonest  poison  likely  to  be  picked  up  in  this  way  are  arsenic  and 
strychnine.  It  is  impossible  to  mistake  a  case  of  strychnine  poisoning,  be- 
cause the  victim  has  twitchings  and  the  limbs  are  drawn  up;  in  the  case 
of  arsenic  there  is  vomiting,  swelling  of  the  tongue,  and  great  pain  espe- 
cially noticeable  if  the  hand  be  placed  on  the  belly.  The  best  thing  to  do 
in  any  case  is  to  administer  an  emetic.  Mustard  and  water  is  the  like- 
liest thing,  and  that  can  be  followed  in  the  case  of  arsenic  by  a  dose  of 
powdered  magnesia,  or,  in  the  case  of  strychnine,  by  giving  a  quantity  of 
fat. 

Rearing  Winter  Puppies. — Puppies  born  during  the  late  autumn  and 
winter  months  are  more  trouble  to  rear  than  those  whelped  in  the  spring 
or  summer.  The  changeable  weather  which  is  experienced  in  most  parts 
tends  to  check  their  growth  and  make  them  more  prone  to  develop  disease 
than  under  more  favorable  circumstances.  Could  weeks  of  hard,  dry  frost 
be  insured,  then  the  rearing  of  puppies  would  be  an  easy  matter,  even  to 
the  novice,  for  however  delicate  the  breed,  it  is  rarely  they  will  not  thrive 
under  such  invigorating  conditions  as  the  sharp,  crisp  air  of  a  bright  frosty 
day  which  is  occasionally  experienced  in  mid-winter.  Puppies,  like  all  ani- 
mals and  vegetable  creation,  will  expand  to  the  sun's  rays,  cold  though  the 
air  may  be,  and  feel  it  is  a  joy  to  live. 

But  even  under  the  most  unfavorable  conditions,  such  as  were  ex- 
perienced during  November  and  December  of  last  year,  it  is  quite  possible 
to  rear  a  large  majority  of  the  puppies,  provided  common  sense  is  brought 
to  bear  and  the  dam  is  well  nurtured  and  nourished  before  and  after 
whelping.  For  the  first  few  weeks  of  their  existence  the  puppies  them- 
selves require  little  attention  beyond  seeting  that  they  all,  as  far  as  possible, 
get  the  same  amount  of  food,  e.  g.,  that  the  stronger  do  not  push  the  weaker 
away  from  the  dam.  When  the  latter  is  the  case,  if  the  puppies  are  val- 
uable, it  is  advisable  to  have  a  good  foster  mother  to  assist  in  rearing  the 
weaker. 

One  cause  of  failure  in  the  rearing  of  autumn  and  winter  puppies  is 
that  they  are  pampered  too  much,  even  very  often  in  the  case  of  the  larger 
and  hardy  breeds,  such  as  St.  Bernards,  Retrievers,  etc.  There  is  a  suc- 
cession of  rainy  days,  the  ground  becomes  wet  and  sodden,  consequently 
the  puppies  are  shut  up  in  a  kennel  run,  an  outhouse,  stable,  barn,  or 
what-not,  where  very  little  light  or  air  can  reach  them,  with  the  result 
that  they  all  lie  huddled  up  together  for  warmth,  there  being  very  little 
natural  warmth  in  their  poor  little  bodies;  they  are  miserable  and  too 
dejected  to  play  and  romp  about.    The  dam,  in  her  mistaken  kindness,  en- 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  263 

courages  them  in  this  lethargic  state,  because  the  door  is  kept  fast  closed 
against  her,  and  she  cannot  have  her  liberty  when  and  how  she  pleases. 

Even  when  the  rain  ceases  and  for  a  few  hours  the  elements  are  pro- 
pitious, advantage  is  not  taken  of  the  smile  of  the  gods  that  be,  and  be- 
cause the  ground  is  wet  and  cold  it  is  thought  these  poor  little  shivering 
puppies  must  not  run  out  and  get  their  little  (or  big)  paws  wet,  they 
must  still  be  kept  in  till  the  ground  has,  at  least,  some  semblance  of  dry- 
ness. Now,  if  advantage  were  taken  of  every  bit  of  dry  weather  and  the 
puppies  allowed  a  run  out  to  exercise,  even  if  only  for  half  an  hour,  they 
would  return  to  their  kennel  refreshed,  their  blood  would  course  through 
their  veins  more  naturally,  they  would  play  and  scramble  about  and  eat 
their  food  with  added  zest. 

When  the  sun,  however,  puts  forth  his  rays,  if  the  puppies  had  some 
straw,  coarse  shavings,  or  dry  bracken  (which  is  often  obtainable  in  the 
country)  laid  down  in  a  corner  of  a  yard  or  garden,  they  could  be  left 
there  for  several  hours,  or  at  least  during  the  warmest  part  of  the  day, 
say  from  11:30  to  2:30,  and  if  a  few  big  bones  were  given  them  they 
would  keep  on  the  move  and  there  need  be  no  fear  of  colds.  Light  and 
air  are  absolutely  necessary  to  all  creation,  and  puppies,  like  men,  cannot 
thrive  without  either;  therefore  if  they  are  to  be  successfully  reared  at  all 
times  of  the  year  they  must  have  a  plentiful  supply  of  both,  which  form 
as  large  a  part  of  their  well-being  as  food. 

Dogs  Barking  at  People  Passing. — Here  is  another  very  bad  habit  that 
dogs  get  into — generally  their  owner's  fault,  and  not  the  dog's,  because 
if  when  the  dog  first  began  this  it  had  been  then  corrected,  this  bad  habit 
would  have  been  checked.  Don't  allow  your  dog  to  run  out  and  bark  at 
any  person  or  vehicle  passing.  When  it  does  so,  get  your  whip  and  give 
the  dog — caught  in  the  act — a  whipping,  and  you  can  soon  break  him  of  it. 
Aside  from  the  annoyance  to  people  it  is  dangerous  for  your  dog,  as  in 
running  and  barking  at  a  team  he  is  liable  to  get  in  front  and  get  run 
over,  hurt  or  killed.     Dogs  must  be  made  to  behave,  as  all  dogs  should  do. 

Fighting  Dogs. J — I  am  a  lover  of  any  and  all  kinds  of  Sport — that  is 
legitimate  and  not  cruel.  If  two  men  want  to  fight — all  right — they  know 
just  what  they  are  doing,  and  what  to  expect,  and  the  one  that  gets  licked 
can  stop  when  he  has  to — and  be  "counted  out."  I  draw  the  line  of  sport  at 
dog  fighting,  a  brutal  sport  (?)  it  is,  and  the  man  who  will  allow  his 
dog  to  fight  is,  just  not  a  man,  and  not  near  as  good  as  the  commonest  cur 
dog  that  ekes  out  a  miserable  existence — a  to  be  pitied — homeless  and 
friendless  wanderer  on  the  streets.  I  breed  Bull  Terriers,  that  would 
rather  fight  than  eat,  if  they  had  been  starved  a  month,  but  never  are 
they  allowed  to  fight  if  I  can  prevent  it,  and  I  generally  can.  I  decline  to 
sell — if  I  know  dog  is  to  be  used  for  fighting,  as  I  would  not  knowingly 
sell  a  dog  for  this  purpose  for  a  thousand  dollars.  I  take  this  oppor- 
tunity right  here  to  advise  any  one  who  wants  a  fighting  dog  to  save  their 
postage  stamps  and  not  write  to  me  for  a  bull  terrier  if  they  want  it  for 
fighting  purposes.  Pure  bred  bull  terriers  are  seldom  used  for  this  pur- 
pose, however,  as  the  persons  who  want  "pit  dogs"  are  the  kind  that  are 
not  willing  to  pay  for  a  genuine  and  well  bred  specimen.  The  mixed  breeds 
used  for  this  are  commonly  called  "Bull  Dogs,"  a  misnomer,  as  a  genuine 
bull  dog  is  never  a  fighting  dog. 


254  USEFUL   INFORMATION   REGARDING  DOGS. 


THE  TEETH  OF  THE  DOG 


The  dog,  like  all  other  animals  that  give  suck  to  their  offspring,  has  two 
sets  of  teeth,  the  first  or  milk  or  deciduous  teeth,  and  the  second  or  per- 
manent teeth,  says  a  writer  in  Field  and  Fancy.  The  first  set  of  teeth  are 
shed  about  three  and  a-half  to  five  or  six  .months  in  the  larger  breed  of 
dogs,  and  from  five  to  seven  months  in  the  smaller  or  Toy  breeds.  Fre- 
quently Toy  dogs  have  a  good  deal  of  trouble  in  shedding  their  teeth,  and 
some,  such  as  the  canines  or  tushes,  are  often  never  shed  at  all,  thus 
leaving  the  dog  with  two  sets  of  tushes,  the  first  being  placed  behind  the 

second. 

The  number  of  teeth  varies  according  to  the  class  of  dog.  The  typical 
number  of  permanent  teeth  is  forty-two.  As  a  rule,  if  there  should  be  any 
variation,  they  are  excess  in  those  clogs  having  long  jaws,  and  are  fewer  in 
the  short-faced  dogs,  such  as  Bulldogs,  Pugs,  Griffons,  Toy  Spaniels,  etc.  In 
the  longer-faced  dogs  there  may  be  as  many  as  forty-four,  while  the  short- 
faced  dogs  may  have  as  few  as  twenty-eight,  and  rarely  more  than  thirty- 
eight.     In  the  hairless  dogs  they  are  usually  even  fewer  still. 

When  the  young  puppy  cuts  his  first  teeth  it  does  not  cause  any  trou- 
ble, but  it  is  the  opposite  when  it  sheds  the  first  and  cuts  the  second  teeth. 
It  is  a  critical  time  with  him,  and  predisposes  him  to  take  various  diseases, 
such  as  fits,  skin  diseases,  distemper,  etc.  In  case  the  first  teeth  are  not 
shed,  so  as  to  prevent  the  shooting  up  of  the  second  teeth,  it  may  be  ne- 
cessary to  extract  them.  When  the  temporary  tushes  are  not  shed  and  the 
second  or  permanent  ones  are  up  in  front  of  them,  the  former  should  be 
extracted  carefully,  so  that  they  are  not  broken  and  the  roots  in  consequence 
left  in  the  jaw. 

Between  the  ages  of  four  and  seven  months  Toy  dogs  should  have  their 
mouths  frequently  examined  in  order  to  discover  if  the  second  teeth  are 
coming  up  properly  and  the  temporary  ones  being  shed  in  due  order.  If 
this  is  not  watched  an  ugly  mouth  may  result.  To  assist  the  falling  of 
the  first  teeth  and  the  regulation  of  the  new  or  second  teeth,  young  puppies 
should  have  large,  uneven,  raw  bones  given  them  to  gnaw  and  tear  at. 

The  earliest  disease  of  the  teeth  is  erosion  of  the  enamel,  which  causes 
the  teeth  to  have  a  worm-eaten  or  cankered  appearance.  It  is  usually 
considered  as  a  guide  that  the  dog  has  had  distemper  either  just  before 
or  at  the  time  or  after  the  second  teeth  have  appeared.  Although  it  may 
be  taken  that  the  dog  has  had  distemper  if  this  appearance  of  the  teeth  is 
present,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  dog  will  not  have  another  or  future 
attack  of  this  disease,  as  cases  are  encountered  with  this  appearance  in 
second  attacks  of  distemper.  When  the  enamel  of  the  teeth  is  eaten  into, 
no  treatment  is  of  any  use  to  restore  the  teeth  to  their  proper  appearance. 

The  commonest  disease  of  the  teeth  is  a  collection  of  tartar  just  around 
the  neck  of  the  tooth  just  above  the  gum,  and  which  may  after  some  time 
insinuate  itself  between  the  gum  and  most  of  the  tooth,  and  set  up  in- 
flammation of  the  tooth  socket,  and  in  consequence  loosen  the  tooth.  Fre- 
quently the  material  encases  the  whole  of  the  tooth,  which  looks  blackish, 
greenish,  yellowish  or  brownish  in  color,  often  giving  off  a  repulsive  odor 
when  the  animal  is  suffering  from  some  ailment.  It  is  due  to  microbes  set- 
tling on  the  teeth  and  manufacturing  a  calcereous  material  out  of  the 
saliva  and  debris  of  food  collecting  on  the  teeth.  It  originates  in  conse- 
quence of  the  animal  being  deprived  of  tearing  food,  such  as  lumps  of  raw 
meat  on  a  bone.  Dry  bones  or  hard  biscuits  do  not  supply  the  absence  of 
this  tearing  food.     The  dog's  teeth  by  nature  are  intended  for  biting  and 


THE    REAL   DOG  PAPER 

THE  ACKNOWLEDGED  LEADER  IN  THE 
KENNEL    WORLD 

AMERICAN  FANCIER 

AND  STOCK-KEEPER 

DEVOTED  EXCLDSIVELY  TO  DOGS 

NOW  IN  ITS  58th  VOLUME 

PUBLISHED  WEEKLY 

$2.00  PER  YEAR 

CLASSIFIED  ADS— 1  cent  per  word 

DISPLAY  ADS— per  inch— $1.00  per  week— $3.00  per  month 

KENNEL  RECEIPT  BOOKS-50  Cents 


UP  TO  DATE  IN  EVERY  WAY 


AMERICAN    FANCIER 

36  Broomfield  Street  Boston,  Mass. 


256  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

tearing  much  more  than  crushing.  Nearly  all  pet  dogs  living  In  towns 
as  they  approach  old  age  suffer  from  this  collection  of  tartar,  whereas 
those  dogs  who  live  in  the  country  and  are  used  for  sporting  purposes, 
shepherding,  watching,  etc.,  are  almost,  if  not  always,  free  from  it.  Again, 
if  the  dog  does  not  use  his  teeth  for  chewing,  the  salivary  glands  in  the 
mouth  are  limited  or  put  out  of  action  and  in  consequence  proper  digestion 
does  not  take  place,  the  chemistry  of  the  mouth  is  upset,  the  secretions 
form  a  suitable  pabulum  for  microbes  to  act  upon  and  manufacture  tartar. 

Therefore,  from  what  has  been  said  above,  if  one  wishes  to  prevent 
the  formation  of  tartar,  one  must  feed  a  dog  on  tearing  food  that  gives  the 
mouth  and  teeth  work  to  do.  If  this  precaution  be  neglected  and  tartar 
should  form,  it  ought  to  be  removed  by  scraping  off  and  brushing  the  teeth 
with  some  suitable  wash,  or  powder,  or  soap,  daily  after  food.  When 
the  mouth  gives  off  a  bad  odor,  five  to  ten  drops  of  dilute  hydrochloric  acid 
should  be  given  with  the  food  daily  as  it  assists  digestion  and  rectifies  the 
faulty  secretions. 

The  most  serious  diseases  of  the  dog's  teeth  is  inflammation  of  the 
covering  of  the  fang  of  the  tooth,  together  with  that  of  the  tooth-socket  or 
alveoius,  which  brings  about  receding  of  the  gum  and  loosening  of  the 
tooth,  the  root  of  which  is  bathed  in  pus,  particles  of  food,  and  saliva.  The 
gums  are  spongy,  bleed  on  the  least  touch,  and  the  mouth  gives  off  a  re- 
pulsive odor.  It  may  or  may  not  be  associated  with  tartar.  It  frequently 
arises  after  distemper,  typhus,  or  other  debilitating  disease.  It  may  be 
arrested  for  a  time  in  young  dogs,  but  usually  the  teeth  fall  out  or  have 
to  be  extracted.  As  this  disease  is  a  progressive  one,  and  mostly  occurs 
in  dogs  that  have  their  food  cut  up  finely  or  have  soft  puppy  food  given 
them  and  teeth  are  not  essential,  should  any  of  them  become  loosened 
they  should  be  extracted.  If  the  gum  has  receded  in  young  dogs  after  some 
debilitating  disease,  it  should  be  brushed  with  peroxide  of  hydrogen  to 
see  if  it  will  arrest  its  progress.  Prevention  should  be  aimed  at  by  giving 
dogs  tearing  food. 

The  rarest  disease  of  the  dog's  teeth  is  true  dental  disease,  caries,  or 
properly  called  decayed  teeth.  As  not  one  in  twenty  or  more,  thousand 
dogs  suffer  from  it,  it  need  not  be  discussed,  beyond  mentioning,  should 
It  arise,  the  tooth  should  either  be  stopped  or  extracted. 

An  associated  disease  of  the  carnassial,  sometimes  precarnassial  or 
cutting  molar  or  back  tooth  of  the  upper  jaw  is  an  abscess  or  swelling  on 
the  cheek  just  below  and  a  little  in  front  of  the  eye,  which  bursts  and  gives 
rise  to  a  discharge  and  then  heals  up,  to  break  out  again  and  again,  form- 
ing a  fistula,  etc.  As  it  is  mostly  due  to  some  disease  of  the  tooth  or 
teeth,  which  should  be  extracted,  as  no  other  treatment  is  of  permanent  use. 
It  is  also  seen  in  cats. 

There  are  several  defects  in  the  position  of  the  teeth  in  the  jaws,  and 
also  defects  of  the  jaw  itself,  so  that  the  teeth  do  not  meet  properly;  and 
as  these  are  not  diseases,  but  only  faulty  or  arrested  developments,  they 
will  not  be  discussed,  but  only  mentioned  here.  The  commonest  defect 
is  undershot,  where  the  lower  jaw  protrudes  in  advance  of  the  upper  jaw; 
and  overshot,  where  the  upper  jaw  protrudes  in  front  of  the  lower  jaw. 
All  degrees  of  deformity  are  encountered,  that  of  the  upper  jaw  some- 
times advancing  several  inches.  In  some  cases  of  chorea,  affecting  the 
head  and  jaws  after  distemper  during  youth,  when  the  bones  of  the  skull 
are  still  yielding  to  pressure,  the  teeth  protrude  from  the  mouth  outward  at 
right  angles,  so  that  the  inner  surface  of  the  upper  teeth  meet  the  inner  sur- 
face of  the  lower  ones,  and  not  touching  at  the  points. 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  257 


PUPPIES 

A  valuable  special  article,  written  by  Harry  W.  Lacy,  editor  American 
Fancier,  for  this  book: 


There  is  such  a  vast  difference  in  the  constitution,  purpose  and  envi- 
ronment of  different  breeds  that  each  one  must  be  regarded  in  a  different 
light.  A  lapdog  leading  a  sedentary  life  must  not  be  fed  like  a  setter,  nor 
a  bulldog  like  a  hard-worked  hound.  So  it  is  in  training.  Each  breed 
must  be  approached  according  to  its  natural  vocation. 

There  should  be  no  trouble  in  raising  most  of  the  puppies,  and  the  point 
that  most  inexperienced  people  fail  to  realize  is  that  the  puppy  organism  is 
a  comparatively  delicate  one,   requiring   considerable  care. 

The  most  delicate  time  in  a  puppy's  life  is  from  the  fifth  or  sixth  week 
— the  time  of  weaning — until  at  least  the  third  month — it  is  between  these 
ages  that  most  puppies  are  sold.  Up  to  the  age  of  weaning  the  pup  has 
been  reared  exclusively  by  its  mother,  and  it  is  during  the  time  following 
this  period,  when  the  youngster  is  having  a  change  of  food,  that  it  is  sub- 
ject to  a  variety  of  ills.  To  start  at  the  beginning,  the  pup  you  have 
selected  is  either  a  nervous  littte  thing,  needing  reassurance,  or  a  cheeky 
brat,  that  needs  suppressing  from  fche  first.  You  will  know  which  va- 
riety you  have  got  the  instant  the  lid  of  the  box  is  off  and  the  pup  finds 
himself  in  a  strange  place.  The  few  hours  on  the  journey  have  been  trying 
ones.  Taken  from  his  dam  and  friends  and  set  down  amid  the  noise  of 
strange  sounds,  he  often  has  a  case  of  nerves.  But  the  dog  above  all  is 
a  gregarious  creature  and  If  properly  approached  he  will  make  himself  at 
home. 

The  moment  the  puppy  arrives  is  the  time  to  take  possession  of  the 
field.  For  at  least  a  week  the  utmost  vigilance  is  required.  If  care  be 
taken  to  prevent  him  from  erring  in  that  first  week,  he  will  know  his  posi- 
tion and  limitations  at  once.  But  if  he  be  allowed  to  own  the  house  it 
will  mean  months  of  arduous  and  discouraging  work  later  to  subdue  him. 
If  the  pup  shows  signs  of  fear  at  first,  caress  him  a  little  just  to  get  up 
his  nerve,  but  be  careful  to  have  him  alone,  as  there  is  nothing  so  discon- 
certing to  the  infant  as  to  be  pounced  upon  by  a  lot  of  strangers.  When 
he  shows  signs  of  "coming  to"  let  him  have  a  few  moments  exercise  in  the 
yard  by  himself.  The  air  will  benefit  him  after  confinement  and  it  will  give 
him  an  opportunity  to  answer  the  imperative  calls  of  puppy  nature. 

After  a  slight  investigation  and  a  few  turns  around  the  yard  the  pup 
will  regain  his  nerves  and  be  ready  for  a  feed — most  of  them  are  con- 
stantly thinking  of  their  stomachs  when  awake.  Be  careful  to  make  his 
meal  very  frugal,  as  it  is  always  unwise  to  feed  while  the  pup  is  in  a 
state  of  excitement,  or  immediately  after  strenuous  exercise.  I  would 
recommend  a  little  "puppy  biscuit" — which  can  be  procured  at  any  of  the 
pet  shops — cracked  up  fine  and  softened  with  hot  water.  A  little  pure 
gravy  or  meat  soup-stock,  free  from  grease,  added  will  prove  very  tempt- 
ing, but  if  he  will  take  the  biscuit  alone  it  is  just  as  well  to  omit  the  gravy, 
until  you  are  sure  the  pup  is  healthy.  Pups,  like  babies,  have  extremely 
delicate  interior  plumbing,  and  if  that  can  be  kept  in  order  until  they  are 
well  started  on  their  growth  there  should  be  no  difficulty. 

After  feeding  procure  a  solid  beef  bone — not  too  large  for  the  dog  to 
handle  with  ease — with  nothing  on  it  but  a  bit  of  tooth  gristle,  and  let 
him  take  it  to  his  bed  and  be  quiet.  There  is  no  solace  so  sweet  as  a  good 
bone.  Left  alone  he  will  soon  devote  his  time  to  the  bone  and  gnaw  him- 
self asleep.     And  if  undisturbed  he  will  awaken  with  a  kindly  disposition 


258  USEFUL   INFORMATION   REGARDING   DOGS. 

towards  his  surroundings.  The  next  step  in  order  is  to  introduce  him  with 
as  little  disturbance  as  possoble  to  the  members  of  the  family.  These 
things  look  trivial  on  the  face,  but  they  save  a  vast  amount  of  confusion  In 
the  puppy   mind   and   a   deal   of  trouble   to   the   owner. 

One  particular  reason  for  avoiding  excitement  is  that  very  small  puppies 
have  little  self-control,  and  a  sudden  fright,  or  even  surprise,  will  result  in 
the  spoiling  of  a  good  carpet  and  this  accident  will  render  house-breaking 
very  difficult.  A  very  important  problem  to  decide  at  once  is  whether  or 
not  the  dog  is  to  be  raised  inside  the  house.  It  is  very  dangerous  to  allow 
a  young  dog  to  sleep  one  night  in  a  warm  room  and  the  next  to  lie  out  in  the 
cold.  A  house  dog  is  much  more  delicate  than  one  raised  outside,  not  only 
on  account  of  being  tender  through  the  comforts  of  artificial  heat,  but 
from  a  deficient  coat. 

If  the  dog  is  to  live  inside  have  his  bed  in  one  place  and  make  him 
use  it.  If  he  is  to  live  outside,  prepare  a  warm  box  which  is  water  tight 
and  fill  it  well  with  clean  straw.  Rye  straw  will  keep  a  dog  almost  as 
clean  as  washing.  Scrupulously  avoid  rags  or  old  carpets,  as  they  hold 
the  dirt  and  dampness,  and  are  consequently  unhealthy.  It  is  wise  to  raise 
the  kennel  several  inches  from  the  ground,  as  it  allows  a  free  circulation 
of  the  air  and  prevents  dampness.  In  cold  weather  the  kennel  should  be 
as  small  as  comfort  will  permit,  as  the  heat  of  the  body  san  raise  it  to  a 
better  temperature  than  a  larger  one.  But  whether  your  puppy  is  to  live 
inside  or  out,  make  the  decision  at  once  and  put  him  in  his  place  as  soon 
as  possible.  If  he  be  destined  to  live  outside  take  every  precaution  to 
have  the  kennel  sheltered  and  dry.  After  a  feed  and  a  sleep  the  dog  will 
accommodate  himself  to  his  surroundings,  and  it  is  always  best  to  initiate 
him  into  his  regular  routine  as  soon  as  he  enters  a  new  home.  This  is 
imperative. 

Dogs,  especially  when  young,  are  largely  creatures  of  habit,  and  it  i3 
therefore  of  the  greatest  importance  to  start  them  right.  Bad  habits  are 
formed  so  quickly  and  are  so  difficult  to  break,  that  with  puppies  a  negative 
course  must  be  pursued  for  a  short  time — at  least  until  the  idea  of  obe- 
dience is  learned.  Before  teaching  your  dogs  tricks,  devote  your  time  to 
the  installing  in  his  mind  the  fact  that  he  is  your  companion,  but  that 
you  are  always  master.  For  a  week  or  ten  days  keep  him  in  the 
straight  and  narrow  path  that  leadeth  to  dogdom.  This  is  not  a  difficult 
task.  It  requires  attention  and  patience,  but  in  no  case  is  the  old  saying, 
"an  ounce  of  prevention  is  worth  a  pound  of  cure"  truer  than  in  the 
training  of  dogs.  Every  successful  breeder  knows  this.  By  cleanliness, 
proper  feeding  and  exercise  he  prevents  disease,  or  at  least  reduces  it  to  a 
minimum.  By  beginning  training  early  he  prevents  the  development  of  bad 
habits.  It  is  just  as  important  for  the  house  pet  to  be  guarded  with  the 
same  care.  Don't  allow  your  new  puppy  privileges  on  his  arrival  that  will 
be  forbidden  later.  If  he  is  not  fed  at  the  table  he  will  not  have  to  be 
chastised  for  being  a  nuisance  when  his  presence  is  undesirable.  Above 
all,  if  you  would  save  your  pet  from  the  many  disorders  common  to  young 
puppies  and  from  untold  suffering,  refrain  from  feeding  cake  and  sweet- 
meats, and  scrupulously  guard  his  stomach. 


DOG  WORLD 

A  REAL  LIVE  UP-TO -DATE 

CANINE  MONTHLY 

PUBLICATION 

"THAT'S  ALL" 

NUF   SAID 


SUBSCRIPTIONS  $1.00  A  YEAR 

SAMPLE  COPY  ON  APPLICATION 


Dog  World  Publishing  Co. 

1333  So.  California  Ave. 
Chicago,  111 


260  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 


THE  DOGLESS   BOY 

"But  the  poor  dog,  in  life  the  firmest  friend, 

The  first  to  welcome,  foremost  to  defend, 

Whose  honest  heart  is  still  his  master's  own, 

Who  labors,  fights,  lives,  breathes  for  him  alone." 

— Byron. 
Boy  is  used  here  in  a  generic  sense,  for  the  love  of  animals,  and  espe- 
cially dogs  ,is  not  confined  to  either  sex.  We  do  not  think  a  boy  was  ever 
born  who,  if  "entered"  properly,  would  not  love  a  dog  when  given  the  op- 
portunity. There  seems  to  be  some  affinity,  between  children  and  dogs. 
The  selfish  cat  may  be  a  family  pet,  but  its  horizon  of  affection  is  usually 
filled  with  a  warm  fireside  and  a  saucer  of  milk  and  the  claws  within  the 
velvet  are  typical  of  its  nature;  uncertain  of  temperament  and  cruel  even 
in  its  seeming  play.  Not  so  the  dog.  It  matters  not  whether  his  lineage 
proclaims  him  a  blue  blood  or  a  mongrel,  there  is  something  behind  the  eye 
of  a  dog  which  draws  to  the  heart.  No  animal  is  so  responsive  to  the  hu- 
manizing effect  as  the  dog.  His  idiosyncracies  and  temperament  are,  like 
those  of  man,  much  a  matter  of  environment.  Cuff  him  and  treat  him 
generally  as  an  Ishmael  and  he  becomes  one,  treat  him  like  so  many  are 
in  kennels  nowadays,  as  a  mere  chattel  to  be  housed  and  fed  as  one  of  a 
number  and  he  becomes  a  mere  automaton;  but  treat  him  as  a  friend,  as 
one  of  your  household  and  how  soon  the  human  influence  is  marked.  His 
ideas  are  widened,  his  intelligence  develops  and  the  many  beautiful  traits 
of  a  confiding,  honest  nature  which  have  earned  him  the  title  of  man's 
best  friend,  are  brought  to  the  surface.  Though  the  society  of  man  has 
a  humanizing  effect  on  our  four-footed  friends,  the  dog  himself  in  no  less 
manner,  through  his  transparent  temperament  and  honest  actions  may  sug- 
gest and  encourage  the  same  traits  in  the  budding  nature  of  his  little  friend. 
Every  boy  should  own  a  dog.  Josh  Billings  well  said  that  in  the  whole 
history  of  the  world  there  is  but  one  thing  that  money  cannot  buy,  to  wit: 
"The  wag  of  a  dog's  tail."  He  might  have  added  there  is  no  animal  on 
God's  earth  who,  in  the  honesty  of  his  affection,  will  still  love  and  wag 
his  tail  for  the  hand  which  beats  him.  The  love  of  Bill  Sykes'  dog  for  his 
brutal  master  is  one  of  the  sublimest  thoughts  Dickens  ever  conceived. 

The  boy  who  is  raised  with  a  dog  for  a  "pal"  is  unwillingly  humanized. 
The  love  for  another  is  engendered  in  his  heart,  and  afterward  has  its 
effect  on  his  conduct  in  the  wide  world  of  mankind.  Be  his  nature  cruel, 
more  from  thoughtlessness  than  any  inherent  feeling,  if  he  is  a  lad  worth 
his  salt  he  cannot  but  learn  a  lesson  from  the  mild  reproach  of  the  brute 
he  torments. 

A  horse  would  kick,  a  cat  would  bite  or  scratch  under  the  same  pro- 
vocation; not  so  the  dog.  There  are  exceptions,  of  course,  but  no  dog,  we 
believe,  is  born  savage;  if  he  develops  bad  temper  it  is  generally  due  to 
environment,  and  the  parent's  judgment  must  be  exercised  in  providing  the 
right  sort  of  dog  for  the  doy,  as  in  other  provisions  for  his  welfare.  A  man 
may  become  a  lover  of  dogs  when  manhood's  cares  and  responsibilities  place 
the  dog  on  the  same  level  as  a  favorite  pipe.  He  has  missed  something. 
He  will  not  "get  into"  his  dog  as  he  would  have  done  as  a  boy.  Once  a 
dog  lover  always  a  dog  lover,  no  matter  whether  the  circumstances  of  his 
after  life  compel  him  to  love  them  from  afar.  The  dog  is  the  better  for  it 
and  so  is  the  man.     Buy  your  son  a  dog. — H.  W.  L. 

HOW  TO  WASH  A  DOG. 

Use  luke  warm  water  in  summer,  but  in  winter  it  can  be  warmer.  Wash 
almost  any  place  in  summer,  except  in  a  windy  place;  but  in  winter  do  it 
in  a  warm  room.     A  couple  of  baths  a  week  in  summer  are  sufficient  for 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  261 

health  and  cleanliness,  and  one  bath  a  week  is  really  just  as  good,  and, 
if  you  would  give  the  dog  in  addition  a  brushing  and  grooming,  I  much 
prefer  tbis  plan.     Once  a  month  in  winter  is  enough. 

Winter  baths  are  risky,  and  great  care  should  be  exercised  as  to 
exposure  to  wet  or  cold  weather  afterward.  In  giving  a  bath  in  cold 
weather  do  so  in  a  warm  room,  using  warm  water.  Give  him  a  good  sham- 
pooing— and  nothing  so  good  as  your  hands — using  plenty  of  soap  and 
rubbing  it  in  so  as  to  open  the  pores  of  the  skin,  and  then  rinse  off  with 
lukewarm  water.  Avoid  getting  the  soap  suds  into  the  dog's  eyes,  or  down 
too  deep  into  his  ears,  and  thoroughly  dry  the  ears  inside.  An  old  wool 
blanket  (a  clean  one  of  course),  is  a  good  thing  for  the  first  drying,  finish- 
ing up  with  rough  towels.  Be  sure  and  get  the  dog's  head,  neck  and  breast 
dry,  for  here  lies  the  danger  of  catching  cold,  and  be  careful  as  to  exposure 
out  of  doors  that  day  if  weather  is  cold  or  wet,  exercising  the  same  care 
and  precaution  you  would  for  yourself  after  a  bath. 

Now,  as  to  soap.  Don't  consider  that  any  soap  will  do  for  your  dog, 
for  it  won't  if  you  value  a  fine  coat  on  him.  Many  common  soaps  will  in- 
jure and  ruin  a  dog's  coat  even  more  than  they  would  your  own  skin  if  you 
used  them.  A  cake  of  dog  soap  will  only  cost  a  quarter  and  last  for 
several  baths,  so  it's  not  expensive  to  use  a  good  one,  in  fact  is  cheaper 
in  the  end.  There  is  no  dog  soap  "just  the  same,"  or,  quite  as  good  as 
Eberhart's.  It  is  a  different  soap  from  any  other,  containing  one  ingre- 
dient that  no  other  dog  soap  ever  made — does  contain — this  one  ingre- 
dient is  a  secret.  There  is  no  carbolic  acid  in  my  soap,  as  there  is  in  so 
many  dog  soaps,  a  dangerous  article  to  use,  and  quite  so  in  a  soap  through 
absorption.  It  is  made  in  as  careful  and  cleanly  a  manner  as  is  any  soap 
made  for  our  own  use,  and  I  just  want  to  say  here  that  no  face  soap  made 
for  people  is  quite  so  good  to  use  on  your  own  face.  As  a  dandruff  cure  on 
your  head  nothing  made  can  surpass  it,  besides  it  is  a  hair  grower,  and  a 
cure  as  well  for  any  scalp  disease.  A  quarter  pound  bar  of  it  I  can  send 
you  by  mail  for  Twenty-five  Cents,  or  a  dozen  for  $2.50,  carriage  paid. 

Spend  at  least  ten  minutes  in  thoroughly  shampooing  your  dog,  then 
rinse  and  dry  dog  thoroughly.  In  summer  weather  a  good  walk,  or  a  romp 
in  a  grassy  yard  is  a  very  good  thing  for  the  dog  after  a  bath  and  it 
has  been  partially  dried,  which  saves  you  some  labor  as  in  turning  the  dog 
out  in  the  yard;  it  will  naturally  run  and  romp  and  finishing  drying  up. 
This  plan  can  only  work  in  warm,  sunshiny  weather.  If  my  soap  is  used 
to  kill  fleas  or  lice,  both  of  which  it  will  do,  then  it  must  be  used  as  di- 
rected for  such  cases — the  lather  being  allowed  to  remain  on  for  some 
time.  Don't  allow  dog  to  rest  or  lie  down  till  its  coat  is  absolutely  dry,  and 
never  wash  within  two  hours  after  it  was  fed. 

As  to  washing  Long  Coated  Dogs,  that  will  often  appear  to  be  dry 
when  they  are  not,  you  must  exercise  great  care.  Fill  a  foot  tub  with 
lukewarm  (not  hot)  water,  so  that  it  reaches  to  the  elbow  of  the  dog, 
and  beginning  at  head,  cover  the  entire  body  with  soap  suds,  never  letting 
the  soap  itself  get  into  the  coat.  With  a  soft  hair  brush  of  long  bristles, 
brush  the  hair  with  the  soap  suds  downward  from  the  centre,  until  he  is 
perfectly  clean.  Rinse  out  the  coat  with  lukewarm  water,  place  the  dog  on  a 
table,  envelope  in  a  soft  towel,  and  smooth  it  from  the  centre  downward  till 
he  is  absolutely  dry.  Never  ruffle  or  rub  the  coat,  or  you  will  spoil  it;  simply 
smooth  it. 

To  prevent  a  dog  catching  cold  after  a  bath  apply  alcohol  over  the 
entire  body.  Exercise  after  a  bath  will  stimulate  circulation.  A  very 
little  cocoanut  oil,  thinned  with  warm  alcohol  in  the  palm  of  the  hand,  rub- 
bed over  the  coat  will  greatly  improve  it  after  washing. 

In  lieu  of  winter  baths  with  no  risk  to  run  as  to  catching  cold,  a  good 
grooming  for  ten  minutes  with  a  stiff  brush  will  accomplish  all  the  good 
results  of  a  bath,  and  this  you  can  do  every  day  with  great  benefit  to  the 
dog.  Grooming  is  better  and  safer  than  baths  in  winter.  In  preparing  dogs 
for  a  bench  show  professional  handlers  groom  their  dogs  every  day  for 
a  month  beforehand,  and  this  is  why  you  always  see  show  dogs  with  such 
fine  coats. 


UC:',  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 


LISTED  WRONG. 
By  Edgar  A.  Guest,  in  Detroit  Free  Press. 

I'VE  never  known  a  dog  to  wag 
His  tail  in  glee  if  he  did  not  feel, 

Nor  quit  his  old-time  friend,  to  tag 
At  some  more  influential  heel. 

The  yellowest  cur  I  ever  knew 

Was,  to  the  hoy  who  loved  him,  true. 

I've  never  known  a  dog  to  show 

Halfway  devotion  to  his  friend. 
To  seek  a  kinder  man  to  know, 

Or  richer;  but  unto  the  end 
The  humblest  dog  I  ever  knew 
Was,  to  the  man  who  loved  him,  true. 

I've  never  known  a  dog  to  fake 

Affection  for  a  present  gain, 
A  false  display  of  love  to  make 

Some  little  favor  to  attain. 
I've  never  known  a  Prince  or  Spot 
That  seemed  to  be  what  he  was  not. 

But  I  have  known  a  dog  to  fight 

With  all  his  strength  to  shield  his  friend, 

And,  whether  wrong  or  whether  right, 
To  stick  with  him  unto  the  end. 

And  I  have  known  a  dog  to  lick 

The  hand  of  him  that  men  would  kick. 

And  I  have  known  a  dog  to  bear 
Starvation's  pangs  from  day  to  day, 

With  him  who  had  been  glad  to  share 
His  bread  and  meat  along  the  way. 

No  dog,  however  mean  or  rude, 

Is  guilty  of  ingratitude. 

The  dog  is  listed  with  the  dumb, 
No  voice  has  he  to  speak  his  creed. 

His  messages  to  humans  come 
By  faithful  conduct  and  by  deed. 

He  shows,  as  seldom  mortas  do, 

A  high  ideal  of  being  true. 


*±1 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  263 


BENCH    SHOWS 


THE  GOOD  AND  BAD  OF. 

I  have  both  judged  and  superintended  dog  shows  for  many  years,  have 
shown  my  own  dogs  for  forty  years,  and  as  a  "Professional  Handler,"  am 
doing  so  yet,  making  about  all  the  important  shows  in  the  United  States, 

To  ship  your  dog  to  any  show,  and  trust  it  to  the  care  of  show  atten- 
dants to  feed,  water  and  exercise — is  simply  a  case  of  cruelty  to  animals, 
such  dogs  I  see  at  a  show. 

Having  superintended  dog  shows,  I  know  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to 
hire  attendants  that  will  properly  do  their  duties,  being  as  they  are,  a  lot 
of  fellows  who  take  the  job  because  they  "are  out  of  work" — chronic  in 
their  cases — due  to  their  worthlessness,  etc. 

The  premium  lists  always  read  that — "all  dogs  will  be  fed,  watered, 
exercised  and  returned  promptly" — signed  by  the  superintendent,  which  is 
meant  all  right,  and  if  this  one  man,  the  superintendent,  could  do  the  work 
of  a  hundred  men,  your  dog  might  then  be  properly  or  better  cared  for 
— but  entrusted  to  the  care  of  attendants — it  is  not,  unless  you  have  a  good 
handler  engaged.  At  every  show,  no  exceptions,  I  see  many  a  poor  dog 
that  is  never  taken  off  his  bench  for  exercise  or  to  attend  to  nature's  calls, 
and  while  he  may  get  a  drink  or  two  and  have  some  dog  biscuit  wet  with 
plain  water  shoved  at  him  to  eat — just  stop  and  realize  what  a  hard  and 
cruel  time  he  is  having  at  the  show — and  don't  wonder  that  he  comes 
home  sick  and  in  many  cases  a  "dead  dog"  the  result.  These  are  plain,  cold 
facts  and  can't  be  disputed.  Aside  from  the  cruel  part,  it  is  as  essential 
to  have  your  dog  well  shown  when  judged,  as  it  would  be  to  have  your 
horse  well  driven  in  a  race — if  you  expect  to  win.  Dogs  sent  unaccom- 
panied by  a  handler,  are  yanked  or  pulled  into  the  ring  by  an  attendant,  a 
stranger  to  the  dog,  and  the  result  accordingly,  in  almost  every  instance. 
During  the  many  years  I  have  shown  dogs,  I  have  rarely  had  a  dog  sick 
afterward  as  the  result  of  being  at  a  show.     The  reason  is  this: 

I  go  to  shows  on  the  same  train  with  my  dogs,  water  and  care  for  them 
en  route,  if  a  "lay  over,"  so  do  I  and  the  dogs  are  taken  care  of  as  they 
deserve.  At  the  show,  every  dog  in  my  string  is  taken  off  his  bench  for  ex- 
ercise four  to  five  times  daily,  fresh  water  kept  in  stall,  bedding  kept  clean 
and  changed,  bowels  watched  when  out  for  exercise  (which  if  wrong,  proper 
treatment  given),  and  instead  of  trusting  them  to  eat  the  dog  bread  mois- 
tened with  water,  which  so  many  are  not  used  to  and  will  refuse  to  touch, 
every  dog  in  my  string  is  fed  morning  and  night  with  beef  and  mutton, 
which"  I  buy  and  have  cooked  daily.  Their  health  is  looked  after  and  if 
any  signs  of  sickness,  proper  remedies  administered.  Every  dog  at  a  show 
should  receive  such  care.  You  can't  do  too  much  for  your  dog  and  if  you 
will  arrange  with  some  good  handler  and  are  willing  to  pay  him  a  fair 
price  for  proper  care,  you  need  never  have  a  sick  dog  as  the  result  of  show- 
ing him. 

To  ship  a  dog  to  a  show  means  from  a  day  or  two  to  three  days  in 
his  crate,  confined  and  uncared  for  as  to  food,  drink,  or  a  chance  to  attend 
to  nature's  calls,  and  thern,  if  dog  is  addressed  to  the  superintendent,  when 
he  finally  arrives  at  the  show,  he  may  lay  that  day  yet  in  his  crate  before 
taken  out,  (the  superintendent  a  very  busy  man),  and  some  attendant  fin- 
ally takes  dog  out  and  without  even  putting  dog  in  the  exercising  ring,  puts 
dog  on  his  bench — where  the  poor  dog  very  likely  stays  for  the  three  or 
four  days  of  the  show;  very  little  if  any  attention  paid  to  him  till  he  is 
packed  up  for  his  return  trip  home.     Your  dog  has  been  serving  time  in 


264  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

prison — and  just  think  how  he  has  suffered,  and  don't  wonder  if  he  comes 
home  sick.  If  you  can  go  yourself — with  your  dog — to  care  for  him,  do 
this,  but  never  send  him  to  a  dog  show  alone.  Get  a  handler,  if  you  can 
find  a  good  man,  who,  aside  from  handling  as  a  business,  really  loves  dogs, 
and  you  think  will  care  for  the  dog — as  the  writer  does — and  be  willing 
to  pay  him  his  price  for  handling — for  your  dog  deserves  the  best  care  he 
can  get. 

I  am  prepared  to  receive  and  condition  dogs  previous  to  shows.  At 
every  show,  without  any  exceptions,  I  see  dogs  on  their  bench — neglected — 
and  while  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  attend  to  them  all,  yet  I  always  do 
and  sometimes  exercise,  if  I  possibly  can. 


DOGS  AS  CHILDREN'S   PETS 


Nothing  in  the  world  is  more  natural  than  the  child's  desire  for  pets. 
There  are  few  children  who  do  not  early  manifest  a  strong  inclination  for 
something  to  love,  and  this  imperative  desire,  if  fostered,  becomes  a  power- 
ful agency  for  the  child's  growth  of  character.  Every  little  girl  loves  her 
doll,  but  often  she  becomes  dissatisfied  and  longs  for  something  alive, 
something  which  will  return  her  caresses.  A  mother  who  has  a  growing 
family  must  do  something  to  keep  the  little  hands  and  minds  busy,  and  at 
the  same  time  out  of  mischief.  Perhaps  the  mother  is  very  busy,  or  if  she 
gives  the  matter  any  thought,  she  may  dislike  animals  and  consider  cats 
a  nuisance,  dogs  noisy,  birds  a  great  care,  rabbits  destructive,  and  white 
rats  dirty.  She  may  wonder  why  the  children  do  not  love  their  home  and 
how  it  is  they  are  always  teasing  to  visit  that  home  where  the  children 
have  pets  of  various  kinds,  "a  perfect  menagerie,"  as  she  scornfully  calls 
it.  Alas!  How  many  mothers  and  fathers  .cherich  their  selfish  ease  and 
consult  their  convenience,  without  a  thought  of  finding  their  highest  en- 
joyment in  the  true  development  of  their  children. 

"Our  first  plea  in  favor  of  children  owning  pets  is  the  desire  for  per- 
sonal possession  which  every  child  has.  The-  wish  for  something  that  shall 
belong  exclusively  to  himself  and  be  cared  for  by  him.  This  care,  this  re- 
sponsibility, can  not  fail  to  make  a  boy  more  manly  and  a  girl  more  wo- 
manly.' The  thought  for  food  and  comfort  of  the  little  animals  tends  to 
develop  all  that  is  strong  and  tender  in  the  child's  nature.  Show  us  a 
boy  or  a  girl  that  is  cruel  or  brutal  to  animals  and  we  will  show  you  a  child 
sure  to  come  to  some  bad  end;  but  the  child  who  early  learns  kindness 
and  gentleness  to  the  brute  creation  will  also  manifest  the  same  spirit 
toward  his  fellow  creatures.  •   •  .  .....' 

"Children  are,  as  a  rule,  fond  of  animals;  and  by  no  means  can  kind- 
ness be  so  thoroughly  inculcated  in  them  as  by  the  care  of  pets. 

"People  who  do  not  love  animals  have  something  seriously  wrong 
in  their  constitution.  A  great  man  once  said,  'I  would  not  give  much  for 
that  man's  religion  whose  dog  and  cat  are  not  the  better  for  it.'  A  man 
who  kicks  his  dog  and  beats  his  horse  will  abuse  his  wife  and  children. 
When  you  encourage  a  child  in  the  care  and  gentle  treatment  of  all  crea- 
tures, you  influence  him  to  become  a  true  gentleman  or  gentlewoman,  and 
you  give  the  world  one  who  will  expand  in  life  and  become  a  tender 
father  and  worthy  citizen.  Every  child  should  know  at  a  nearly  age  that 
sincere  kindness  in  all  relations  of  life  is  highest  Christianity.  *  *  * 
Allow  the  children  a  pet  dog,  because  dogs  are  so  devoted,  so  intelligent,  so 
faithful  that  they  are  ready  to  sacrifice  their  lives  for  those  they  love. 

"Once  kind  to  animals  always  kind,  and  the  man  or  woman  whose 
heart  is  touched  by  the  dumb  look  of  dependence  or  unselfish  interest  in 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  265 

brute  nature  cannot  be  wholly  bad  though  public  sentiment  may  make  he 
or  she  a  criminal. 

"All  animals  are  God's  creatures  with  an  intelligence  a  little  lower  than 
our  own;  they  are  moreover  dumb  and  helpless  and  should  appeal  to  every 
noble-hearted  person  for  protection.  The  curse  of  the  world  is  heartless- 
ness,  selfishness  and  cruelty. 

"Animals  are  God's  object-lessons,  and  the  only  object-lesson  in  Na- 
ture into  which  he  has  breathed  the  breath  of  life." 

Sir  Walter  Scott's  eulogy:  "The  Almighty,  Who  gave  the  dog  to  be 
the  companion  of  our  pleasures  and  our  toils,  hath  invested  him  with  a 
nature  noble  and  incapable  of  deceit.  He  forgets  neither  friend  nor  foe, 
remembers  with  accuracy  both  benefit  and  injury,  and  hath  a  share  of 
man's  intelligence  but  no  share  of  man's  falsehood."  Not  only  have  poets 
honored  and  glorified  the  courage,  patience  and  fidelity  of  dogs,  but  the 
world's  greatest  artists  have  portrayed  their  humility  and  affection.  There  is 
also  positive  proof  that  in  the  Pharaonic  age,  nearly  sixty  centuries  ago, 
dogs  were  the  companions  and  friends  of  kings,  and  each  had  a  name  of  its 
own,  and  this  at  a  period  when  only  those  whose  personality  was  recognized 
were  ever  given  a  name. 


PATHOS 


This  gem,  pathetic  and  beautiful,  was  in  my  last  book,  and  is  too  good 
to  be  left  out  of  this. 

Mr.  H.  G.  Jeffrey,  of  the  Fifth  Mounted  Infantry,  stationed  at  the  Mod- 
der  River,  Cape  Colony,  sends  Our  Dogs  the  following  interesting  and  pa- 
thetic account  of  the  return  home  of  the  Boers  after  the  war: 

"Peace  has  come  at  last.  Mothers,  both  English  and  Dutch,  have  been 
relieved  of  great  anxiety;  the  daily  searching  of  the  papers,  the  terrible 
uncertainty,  is  all  over.  Briton  and  Boer  are  now  united;  the  latter  are 
now  returning  to  their  homes. 

"Let  us  accompany  a  young  burgher  who  has  escaped  from  the  terrible 
conflict.  Go  with  him  back  to  the  old  homestead  beneath  the  'kop,'  on  the 
threshold  of  what  was  once  his  happy  home — now  nothing  more  than  a 
desolate  ruin.  He  sits  down  on  all  that  is  left  of  the  'stoep,'  lost  in  reverie. 
He  is  fighting  all  his  battles  over  again,  thinking  of  those  who  had  sat 
on  that  same  'stoep'  three  years  ago.  The  sun  is  just  settling  with  that 
gloriousness  for  which  the  African  veldt  alone  is  famous.  The  stillness  is 
more  than  he  can  bear,  and  he  could  almost  weep  for  very  loneliness.  But 
hark!  He  is  not  alone;  softly  a  cold  nose  pushes  itself  into  his  hand,  and 
two  wistful,  loving  eyes  are  upturned  to  his.  'Tis  his  old  dog,  a  skeleton 
of  former  days;  too  weak  almost  to  stand,  but  who  has  remained  faithfully 
watching  the  old  home,  never  expecting  to  hear  his  beloved  master's  voice 
again.  I  know  there  are  plenty  of  canine  hearts  and  tongues  left  amongst 
the  ruined  homesteads  that  will  give  a  hearty  welcome  to  their  long-lost 
masters." 


266  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

ONLY  A  COLLIE  DOG. 


The  trolley's  rumple  sounded 

Above  the  voice  of  man, 
"When  out  upon  the  pavement 

A  little  child  ran. 

Men  held  their  breath  in  silence, 

For  down  upon  her  bore 
A  big  whirring  auto  car 

With  honk,  and  glare  and  roar. 

But  out  upon  the  pavement, 

In  the  heart  of  London's  fog, 
There  dashed,  not  heeding  danger,. 

A  big  brown  collie  dog. 

Without  a  thought  of  danger, 

While  men  held  their  breath, 
Out  of  the  grasp  of  heaven 

He  snatched  the  child  from  death. 

But  there  upon   the  pavement, 

In  the  midst  of  London's  fog, 
Lay  the  bruised  and  torn  body 

Of  only  a  collie  dog. 
Stratford,  Ont.  — Georgia  Wrinkler. 


BUY  A  DOG. 


"I've  been  a  good  fellow,  boys, 
I've  earned  all  I've  spent; 
Paid  all  I  borrowed, 
Lost  all  I  lent. 

I  loved  a  woman  once, 
That  came  to  an  end; 

Buy  a  dog,  boys, 

He  is  always  your  friend." 


LADDIE." 


This  poetic  tribute  to  the  dog  that  has  gone  beyond  after  a  life  of  devo- 
tion to  his  master  seems  to  us  one  of  the  best  and  most  touchingly  real. 
It  was  written  by  the  playwright  who  resides  at  Kensington,  L.  I.,  on  the 
passing  of  his  favorite  collie.  Without  a  trace  of  the  maudlin  it  touches 
the  chord  that  holds  the  dog  so  near  to  man: 

He  wagged  his  tail,  to  the  very  last 

And  he  smiles,  in  his  last,  long  sleep. 
The  troubles  of  life,  for  him,  are  past, 

In  his  grave,  a  few  feet  deep. 

His  soul,  for  I  feel  that  he  had  a  soul 

And  he  thought  real  thoughts,  I  know, 
Has  found   the  ultimate  end,  life's  goal, 

In  the  Heaven  where  good  dogs  go. 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  267 

He  has  lived  with  me  and  has  suffered  with  me, 

Shed  tears,  in  his  dog-like  way, 
He  has  placed  his  paw  at  times  on  my  knee, 

In  a  vain  attempt  to  say, 
"God  never  gave  us  that  wondrous  power, 

To  tell  all  the  things  we  feel, 
But  I  want  to  say,  in  my  canine  way, 

That  my  sympathy  is  real." 

So  I  loved  my  dog,  to  the  very  end 

And  he  in  our  daily  walk, 

Was  never  just  dog,  put  a  constant  friend 

And  we  had  no  need  to  talk. 
And  I  hope,  when  the  summons  comes  for  me, 

To  embark  on  the  unknown  tide, 
I  shall  find  his  eyes  in  the  Paradise, 

They  say  is  the  other  side. 

JAMES  CLARENCE  HARVEY. 


MY  TRIBUTE  TO  THE  DOG. 


Senator  Vests  tribute  to  a  dog,  (elsewhere  in  this  book),  was  probably 
the  grandest  ever  made,  and  I  want  to  offer  mine,  having  known  and  loved 
dogs  all  my  life;  and  the  balance  of  my  time  on  earth  will  be  devoted  to 
them: 

No  other  animal,  and  none  of  them  can  talk,  equals  your  dog  for 
honesty  to  you;  love,  faithfulness,  constancy,  and  all  the  traits  that  a  hu- 
man friend — your  sister,  brother,  mother  or  father — should  show  to  you. 
Your  dog  is  sad  when  he  sees  you  are  sad,  knows  you  are  lonely,  feels  for 
you  when  he  sees  and  knows  you  need  it,  (as  we  often  do),  and  if  he  could 
— would  do  anything  for  you  to  help  you,  the  one  he  loves.  He  would 
steal  or  kill  for  you,  sto  pat  nothing.  What  a  grand  and  wonderful  thing 
is  a  dog's  love  for  you — and  yours  for  your  dog,  if  you  have  been  made 
right — and  from  a  child  up,  have  loved  dogs.  You  can  never  do  too  much 
for  your  dog,  nor  can  you  improve  your  own  life  and  fit  it  for  the  unknown 
world  you  are  to  go  to,  when  death  comes,  than  to  do  all  the  good  you 
can  for  your  dog,  and  for  other  dogs,  even  the  poor  homeless  curs  you  meet 
on  the  streets,  for  they  have  as  big  a  heart,  as  noble  in  every  way,  only 
lacking  the  "pedigree,"  (not  their  fault),  as  the  fine-bred  ones.  Strive  to 
do  some  good  each  day  of  your  life  to  dogs,  for  you  can't  do  anything 
better,  (aside  from  paying  every  dollar  you  owe,  which  includes  your  taxes)., 
and  you  will  get  rewarded,  which,  if  not  so  plainly  shown  each  day — you 
are  getting  credited  for  it  in  the  big  book  up  above,  where  we  all  hope  to  go, 
and  when  the  final  balance  sheet  is  checked  off,  you  will  get  all  that  was 
coming  to  you,  because  you  have  done  good  to  dogs.  Fight  for  your  dog 
if   necessary,   he   would    for   you. 

AL.  G.  EBERHART. 


J«8  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

THE  MODEL  KENNEL — HOW  TO  BUILD. 


The  following  valuable  article  was  written  especially  for  tin's  book  by 
Mr.  Fred  Jacobi,  Proprietor  of  the  Woodbine  Kennels,  Lowell,  Mich.: 

In  view  of  the  fact  that  "Man's  Best  Friend,"  the  dog,  has  proven  him- 
self the  most  faithful  of  all  animals,  accepting  with  good  grace  such  care 
as  may  be  bestowed  upon  him,  whether  it  be  from  the  hands  of  the  rich 
whose  home  is  surrounded  with  everything  that  is  beautiful  and  luxurious, 
or  the  poor  wandering  tramp  who  can  only  afford  to  divide  the  few  crumbs 
that  he  is  able  to  beg  or  steal,  to  this  ever  true  companion  should  be  granted 
the  privilege  and  pleasure  of  a  place  that  he  may  know  is  his  home. 

The  kennel  raised  dog  has  not  the  liberties  and  pleasures  of  the  or- 
dinary house  dog,  and  to  him  more  attention  should  be  given  as  to  his 
home  and  surroundings  that  he  may  thrive  well  and  be  in  fit  condition 
to  be  seen  at  all  times.  No  dog  can  present  a  good  appearance  if  he  is 
brought  up  from  puppyhood  in  a  cellar  or  old  sheds,  cramped  quarters  and 
foul  surroundings,  with  a  dozen  mates  to  join  in  the  miserable  life,  as  is 
often  done  by  some  breeders.  It  is  no  wonder  that  these  dogs  are  always 
out  of  condition,  loaded  with  skin  diseases  which  infest  such  places.  Many 
men  would  gladly  give  their  dogs  a  better  home  and  have  surroundings 
more  comfortable,  yet  they  have  been  at  a  loss  how  to  construct  a  kennel 
that  would  be  best  adapted  for  the  dog's  welfare.  In  this  article  I  have 
tried  to  get  a  thorough  description  of  a  "model  kennel"  well  suited  for  the 
convenience  of  twenty-five  dogs,  and  as  many  more  puppies.  These  nlans 
are  not  imaginary,  but  exhibited  at  the  Woodbine  Kennels,  Lowell,  Mich., 
where  visitors  are  always  welcome. 

First  should  be  considered  the  location.  This  should  be  high  and  dry 
soil,  a  side  hill  will  give  the  best  results  so  that  excessive  rains  will  not 
form  pools  of  water  in  the  kennel  yard.  Select  your  site  and  stake  it  off  ten 
rods  square.  Get  cedar  posts  nine  feet  long,  set  them  in  the  ground  three 
feet,  one  rod  apart,  taking  special  care  that  corner  posts  are  firmly  anchored. 
Dig  a  trench  from  post  to  post  eighteen  inches  deep.  Next  get  some  No. 
12  galvanized  wire,  lay  this  in  trench  and  staple  to  each  post,  drawn  tight 
with  wire  stretcher.  After  this  wire  is  drawn  tight  all  around  the  yard 
at  bottom  of  trench,  then  start  the  second  wire  just  two  inches  above  the 
lower  wire,  then  the  third,  and  so  on  until  you  have  nine  rows  of  wire  two 
Inches  apart.  Next  throw  the  earth  into  the  trench,  leaving  the  top  wire 
exposed.  By  taking  this  precaution  you  may  rest  assured  that  your  dogs 
will  never  trouble  you  by  digging  out  of  the  kennel  yard.  Now  get  fortv 
rods  of  good,  reliable  kennel  fencing,  which  should  be  six  feet  high,  and 
a  two-inch  mesh.  Fasten  to  posts  firmly,  the  lower  wire  meeting  the  top 
wire  previously  fastened  from  post  to  post. 

The  foundation  of  kennel  building  should  be  next  to  be  considered, 
this  should  be  of  stone,  18  inches  thick  and  three  or  four  feet  high,  16x60, 
will  furnish  ample  room.  Have  opening  at  each  end  of  wall,  2x3  feet,  to 
allow  dogs  to  run  in  during  hot  days  or  stormy  weather.  Next  lay  the  joists. 
then  the  studding,  which  should  be  six  or  seven  feet  high.  Have  good 
pitch  to  roof.  Before  putting  on  siding  or  shingling,  get  some  good  building 
paper,  covering  all  sides  and  roof.  For  this  purpose  there  is  nothing  finer 
made  than  "Cabot's"  sheathing,  a  superior  building  paner,  two  lavers  of 
paner  between  which  is  woven  eel  grass  %  inch  in  thickness.  This  paper 
will  keen  out  heat  as  well  as  cold,  is  germ  proof  and  can  not  burn  on  ac- 
count of  the  saltv  nature  of  the  lining.  Place  this  on  roof  boards  before 
shingling  if  a  thorough  iob  is  wanted.  Next  put  on  your  siding.  Have 
three  windows  on  each  side.  30x6  0,  two  sash  that  will  slide  by  each  other, 
much  handier  than  ones  that  raise.  Have  door  at  each  end  of  kennel. 
Have  a  brick  chimney  built  at  each  end  of  kennel.  In  summer  time  you 
can  use  chimney  in  cook  room  with  short  length  of  pipe;  in  the  cold 
weather  you  can  run  stove  pipe  the  full  length  of  building  to  other  chim- 
ney, which  will  warm  up  the  interior  at  no  greater  expense  while  the  food  is 
being  cooked.  Next  put  up  a  partition  at  each  end  of  building,  10x16,  one 
f#  b&  used  tor  poojf  #nd  wash  pom,  (the  QtyGt  tor  .office.    The  floor  i&  f.h§ 


tlSEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  269 

Wash  room  should  be  built  on  a  slant  to  allow  all  water  to  run  away  freely. 
You  will  now  have  a  space  of  forty  feet  between  office  and  cook  room 
which  will  be  used  for  kennels  or  stalls  for  the  dogs  as  follows:  On  each 
side  of  building  from  office  to  cook  room  make  a  solid  bin  or  box  of  match- 
ed flooring  three  feet  high  and  four  feet  wide;  the  frame  work  of  this 
stall  should  be  of  two-inch  strips,  one  inch  thick,  have  them  cut  three  and 
four  feet  long,  nail  firmly  at  corner  one  of  each  size;  this  will  form  a  square; 
now  draw  a  line  from  one  end  of  room  to  other  on  each  side  near  wall, 
this  will  line  up  your  frame  work  perfectly.  Nail  one  end  of  frame  to  each 
studding,  the  other  corner  to  floor,  now  proceed  to  put  on  your  matched 
flooring.  Nail  front  solid,  the  top  should  be  en  hinge  to  get  at  dogs  and 
clean  out  easily,  so  only  nail  firmly  the  two  first  boards  near  wall,  then 
have  balance  of  top  work  on  hinge.  Now  divide  this  long  stall  in  small 
compartments  by  placing  a  partition  of  matched  flooring  at  every  second 
studding  or  four  feet,  studding  being  two  feet  apart;  have  top  sawed  across 
every  four  feet  so  that  each  stall  will  have  a  separate  door  at  top,  which 
will  give  you  ten  separate  stalls  on  each  side.  Now  have  an  opening  cut 
through  siding,  12x18,  for  a  door  in  each  stall;  have  this  at  one  end  of 
each  stall  instead  of  centre,  as  your  dogs  can  lay  away  from  doorway  in 
case  of  heavy  winds  or  hot  or  cold  weather.  In  winter  weather  for  day 
protection  have  a  common  grain  sack  or  carpet  tacked  on  inside  over  door 
to  keep  out  cold  and  severe  drafts.  For  night  protection  a  dog  should 
have  even  more  than  this  for  a  dog,  like  the  human  being  enjoys  comfort 
at  night.  For  this  purpose  the  simplest  and  best  method  is  to  have  a 
sliding  door  on  outside.  This  should  be  made  of  matched  flooring  four 
inches  wider  and  longer  than  the  opening,  and  have  this  door  made  so  it 
will  slide  easily  up  and  down  by  placing  a  screw  eye  on  top  to  which  is 
fastened  a  good  heavy  cord,  having  this  pass  up  and  over  a  pulley  through 
a  hole  in  building,  so  that  door  can  be  raised  or  lowered  at  will  from  each 
side  of  building.  After  the  stalls  are  made  you  will  have  a  large  room,  40 
feet  long  and  8  feet  wide,  where  you  can  keep  a  sick  dog  or  bitches  in 
season,  or  use  it  as  a  store  room  for  crates,  etc.  One  side  of  the  kennel  and 
yard  should  be  kept  for  matured  dogs,  the  other  for  puppies  and  bitches  in 
season  or  for  bitches  with  pups.  In  order  to  protect  the  pups  and  bitches 
in  season,  get  some  wire  fencing  and  divide  off  one  side  of  kennel  yard 
same  as  their  stalls,  nail  one  end  of  fencing  firmly  to  building  or  to  a  post 
set  at  building  and  have  this  fencing  go  straight  out  to  a  post  at  fencing 
which  composes  your  main  kennel  fence.  This  will  give  you  ten  separate 
yards  that  are  four  feet  wide  and  about  forty  feet  long,  sufficient  for  the 
puppies  until  they  are  old  enough  to  go  in  the  main  yard  with  the  matured 
dogs.  Bitches  kept  in  an  enclosure  like  this  are  absolutely  safe  from  stray 
stud  dogs,  neither  can  they  get  out,  as  has  been  the  source  of  much  an- 
noyance to  many  owners  of  bitches  in  season.  Do  not  neglect  to  place  eva 
troughs  on  building,  have  a  large  tank  to  catch  the  water  so  that  you  may 
always  have  a  good  supply  of  soft  water  for  washing  the  dogs.  The  handiest 
tub  to  wash  dogs  in  is  made  of  clear  pine  boards  14  in.  wide,  6  feet  long. 
Make  box  tight  and  paint  it.  With  a  box  like  this  you  can  work  all  around 
your  dogs  in  washing.  Place  this  tub  near  tank,  have  tank  elevated  so  that 
after  washing  you  can  give  the  dog  a  good  rinsing  from  tank  which  should 
have  a  faucet  and  short  piece  of  hose  at  bottom.  Remember  that  the 
kennel  yard  should  be  plowed  up  or  spaded  over  once  a  month;  this  will 
keep  the  soil  in  a  sweet  and  sanitary  condition.  Do  not  forget  that  a  dog 
likes  to  lay  under  the  spreading  branches  of  a  shade  tree,  and  that  it  will 
add  to  their  comfort  to  have  a  generous  amount  set  in  the  yard  as  well 
as  a  row  around  it.  For  this  purpose  there  is  not  a  handsomer  or  more 
thrifty  fast-growing,  tree  than  the  Carolina  poplar,  not  the  tall,  lanky 
Lombard  poplar,  which  is  an  eye  sore  and  nuisance.  The  Carolina  poplars 
can  be  secured  from  any  nursery  at  from  15  to  25  cents  each  when  ten  feet 
high;  these  will  make  large  trees  in  three  years.  The  kennel  yard  would 
mot  be  complete  without  a  good  pump  and  well  so  that  the  dogs  can  have 
fresh  water  several  times  each  day.  An  earthen  dish  of  good  size  is  best 
for  this,  and  have  it  sunk  in  ground  to  keep  water  cool.     If  convenience  19 


270  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

wanted  and  small  expense  not  objected  to  it  would  be  well  to  have  a  one- 
inch  pipe  run  from  pump  to  each  of  the  yards  leading  to  each  dish;  at  the 
pump  you  could  have  a  connection  that  would  fill  each  dish  independently  or 
fill  all  at  one  time;  this  would  avoid  the  bother  of  carrying  water  in  pail 
to  each  dish. 

If  you  follow  the  plans  as  set  forth  above,  I  know  you  will  have  a 
kennel  that  will  suit  you  in  every  detail  and  one  which  will  be  a  pleasure 
to  your  best  friends,  "the  dog."  Should  you  at  any  time  wish  any  further 
advice  on  this  subject,  I  will  be  only  too  pleased  to  assist  you  in  any  way 
possible,  knowing  it  will  benefit  the  kind,  dumb  creature  who  gives  his 
master  worlds  of  pleasure  and  is  ever  faithful,  be  he  the  companion  of  the 
rich  or  poor. 

Stud  JDogs. — a  great  deal  of  a  breeder's  success  depends  upon  the 
state  of  health  in  which  the  stud  dog  begets  offspring;  for  a  delicate  or  un- 
healthy dog  is  more  than  likely  to  transmit  his  defects  to  his  puppies,  who 
are  in  consequence  more  difficult  to  rear,  and  of  less  value  when  they  at- 
tain maturity.  Considerable  attention  should  therefore  be  paid  to  the 
comfort  of  a  dog  who  is  in  the  habit  of  receiving  a  large  number  of  stud 
visits.  He  should,  if  possible,  be  well  exercised  morning  and  evening,  either 
by  a  country  walk,  or  a  run  round  his  owner's  yard;  and  his  diet  must  be 
wholesome  and  liberal.  Stud  dogs  should  never  be  used  during  the  heat 
of  the  day,  whatever  the  exigencies  may  be.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind, 
too,  that  it  is  always  well  to  have  your  stud  dogs  look  clean  and  tidy, 
both  when  out  of  doors  and  when  in  the  kennels.  Much  depends  upon  the 
first  impressions  formed  by  the  owner  of  a  bitch  who  contemplates  breeding 
from  him,  and  many  a  dog  is  passed  over  whose  services,  had  he  been  in 
better  fettle,  might  have  been  resorted  to.  Care  should  be  taken  not  to 
overtax  the  energies  of  a  young  sire  by  allowing  him  to  receive  too  many 
visits;  the  result  of  excesses  in  this  way  being  both  sickly  offspring  and 
his  own  ultimate  failure  at  the  stud.  Fifteen  or  twenty  bitches  a  year  are 
quite  enough  for  a  dog  not  in  his  prime,  and  about  twice  the  number  for 
a  dog  in  the  full  vigor  of  his  strength.  As  a  rule,  dogs  under  eighteen 
months  old  are  not  likely  to  do  themselves  or  their  owners  much  good  if 
bred  from;  and  availing  one's  self  of  the  services  of  a  very  old  dog  is  always 
risky.  It  is  extremely  hard  to  state  an  age  at  which  a  dog  can  be  said  to 
be  "old;"  some  retain  the  vigor  of  their  youth  up  to  ten  years  and  more, 
whilst  others  get  decript  and  break  up  at  six  or  seven.  So  much  depends 
upon  constitution  and  careful  attendance  that  it  is  impossible  to  advise  upon 
the  age  at  which  a  stud  dog  ceases  to  be  of  use;  but  breeders  should  see 
the  dog  for  themselves,  if  they  do  not  know  him,  and  judge  from  his  ap- 
pearance and  condition,  whether  he  is  likely  to  suit  their  wishes. 

In  this  age  of  bench  show  celebrities  the  precautions  necessary  to  ob- 
tain the  best  results  are  too  often  neglected  in  the  case  of  a  stud  dog  on 
which  there  is  a  big  run,  and  doubtless,  carelessness  in  looking  after  the 
bitch  is  responsible  for  a  good  many  "misses." 

A  sire  should  be  looked  upon  with  suspicion  if  his  services  are  in  too 
great  request,  and  the  number  of  his  receptions  unlimited,  as  it  is  only 
reasonable  to  expect  sickly  offspring  from  a  dog  whose  stud  experiences 
are  practically  unrestricted.  A  very  old  dog,  unless  mated  to  a  young  and 
vigorous  bitch,  is  more  than  likely  to  fail  to  get  stock  at  all;  and  if  he 
succeeds  in  doing  so,  the  puppies  are  very  frequently  of  bad  constitution 
and  delicate  in  their  earlier  days.  It  is  often  the  case  that  the  services 
of  a  successful  show  dog  are  most  eagerly  sought  after  by  breeders,  and 
the  merits  of  his  father  entirely  overlooked;  and  this  is  certainly  a  fact 
which  must  puzzle  all  practical  men  when  they  reflect  upon  it.  A  good  sire 
of  good  pedigree,  who  can  produce  stock  of  superior  quality  to  himself,  is 
better  worth  patronizing  at  a  low  fee  than  his  successful  son  who  has  yet 
to  prove  himself  the  success  at  the  stud  which  he  is  on  the  bench  or  in 
the  field;  especially  as  in  the  latter  instance  the  sum  charged  for  his  ser- 
vices is  sure  to  be  a  considerable  one.  Many  of  our  champion  dogs  have 
turned  out  complete  failures  from  a  breeder's  point  of  view;   while  their 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  271 

plainer  looking  fathers  or  brothers  have  begotten  offspring  of  a  far  better 
stamp,  though  with  only  half  the  chances  of  success. 

A  stud  fee  is  for  the  service  of  the  dog  to  the  bitch,  irrespective  of 
whether  any  puppies  result  from  the  union  or  not,  unless  special  arrange- 
ments have  been  previously  made  between  the  owner  of  stud  dog  and  brood 
bitch,  varying  that  accepted  custom,  or  the  dog  should  be  proved  a  non- 
stock getter,  in  which  case  the  latter  may  claim  back  any  fee  paid.  After 
the  visit  they  should  both  be  fed  and  put  away  in  a  separate  kennel.  A 
bitch  that  has  visited  the  dog  should  not  be  sent  on  a  railway  journey  the 
same  day. 

Bitches  Sent  for  Service. — On  the  arrival  of  a  bitch  for  service,  the 
owner  of  the  stud  dog  should,  unless  time  is  a  matter  of  consideration, 
fasten  her  up  securely  and  let  her  recover  from  the  fatigues  of  her  journey 
before  the  introduction  takes  place.  A  night's  rest  and  a  feed  are  very  likely 
to  assist  Natures'  course,  a  bitch  served  immediately  after  a  tiring  journey 
being  far  more  likely  to  miss  conception  than  one  who  has  rested  and  be- 
come a  little  accustomed  to  the  place  and  those  around  her.  Many  bitches 
are  very  troublesome  and  restive  when  with  the  dog,  and  throw"  them- 
selves about  in  a  violent  manner;  others  are  savage  and  morose,  and  if 
not  carefully  looked  after  are  likely  to  fly  at  him  and  perhaps  do  some 
serious  injury.  In  such  cases  the  bitch  must  be  held  by  the  collar,  but  care 
should  be  taken  that  she  does  not  get  half  suffocated  by  too  tight  a  grasp 
being  placed  on  it.  The  possibility  of  a  fight  taking  place,  or  of  the  dog 
requiring  some  assistance,  especially  in  the  case  of  young  bitches,  make  it 
undesirable  that  the  pair  should  be  left  alone  together  for  any  length  of. 
time,  much  less  after  connection  has  terminated. 

After  union  it  is  some  time  before  the  animals  can  be  separated; 
twenty  minutes  is  about  the  average,  though,  of  course,  this  period  is  often 
exceeded  or  decreased  in  duration.  After  that  the  breeder  must  wait  pa- 
tiently for  Nature  to  take  its  course,  when  the  bitch  should  be  kennelled 
by  herself  on  straw,  and  kept  as  quiet  as  possible.  It  is  desirable  that 
a  second  visit  should,  if  possible,  be  paid  after  an  interval  of  thirty-six  or 
forty-eight  hours.  The  majority  of  the  owners  of  stud  dogs  gladly  con- 
sent to  this  arrangement,  as  it  lessens  the  chances  of  the  bitch  proving  bar- 
ren, and  also  saves  them  trouble,  and  their  dogs  from  getting  a  bad  name 
as  a  stock  getter. 

When  you  get  your  bitch  home,  she  is  very  likely  to  be  yet  in  season, 
as  being  served  generally  prolongs  the  season  for  a  few  days — and  you  must 
now  be  very  careful  that  no  other  dog  gets  at  her,  which  might  spoil  all 
that  was  done. 


KENNEL  SUGGESTIONS 


Quite  a  number  of  the  following  have  been  written  by  Harry  W.  Lacy, 
Editor  of  the  American  Fancier,  a  mair  who  understands  dogs  and  their 
care,  which  he  learned  in  England — and  I  have  saved  these  up,  as  much 
benefit  can  be  derived  therefrom,  as  well  as  "Kennel  Dont's,"  which  fol- 
lows this. 

A  number  of  suggestions  for  the  care  of  dogs  have  been  made  from 
time  to  time  in  "Notes  for  Novices"  in  Our  Dogs  (Eng.),  and  in  them 
there  is  a  great  deal  to  be  learned  in  the  way  of  detail  by  every  novice 
who  starts  to  keep  a  dog  or  dogs.  Incessant  watching  for  and  proper  at- 
tention to  those  little  matters  count  for  much  more  than  one  would  think 
at  first  sight.  But  the  experienced  fancier  knows  the  value  of  those  extra 
attentions,  and  his  knowledge  can  be  seen  in  the  general  appearance  of 


272  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

his  dogs,  whereas  the  new  beginner  is  often  too  fond  of  leaving  servants 
and  other  disinterested  persons  matters  which  he  should  attend  to  himself. 

Take,  for  instance,  the  matter  of  feeding.  How  many  dog  owners 
there  are  (especially  in  the  upper  class  of  society)  who  never  give  the  least 
attention  to  their  dog's  feeding,  leaving  it  entirely  to  others,  and  only 
waking  up  now  and  again  when  something  has  gone  wrong.  Feeding,  if 
left  to  any  careless  person  who  chances  to  be  employed  about  the  premises, 
is  certain  to  be  irregular  and  unsatisfactory,  and  every  owner  ought  to 
consider  it  his  bounden  duty  to  superintend  regularly  the  feeding  of  his 
dumb  friends. 

Many  dogs  are  given — especially  when  hungry — to  "bolting"  their  food. 
This  is  a"  bad  habit,  and  is  sure  to  have  an  ill  effect  sooner  or  later.  To 
prevent  a  dog  from  habitually  doing  this  it  is  best  to  give  him,  before  his 
proper  meal,  a  hard,  dry  biscuit.  This  will  take  off,  as  it  were,  the  edge 
of  appetite  and  so,  when  the  usual  basin  is  given,  it  will  be  consumed 
more  moderately. 

Large  bones  should  be  regularly  given  to  dogs,  because  they  act  splen- 
didly as  cleaners  to  the  teeth,  the  rasping  of  every  vestige  of  meat  doing 
this  most  effectually.  Large  bones  only  should  be  given,  because  if  too 
small  the  dog  will  crunch  them  up  and  swallow  them,  which  is  dangerous. 

The  best  way  to  give  a  pill  to  a  dog  is  to  sew  it  up  in  a  piece  of  meat. 
Then  tossing  the  animal  one  or  two  pieces  of  similar  size,  which  are  at 
once  bolted,  the  piece  containing  the  pill  may  follow  successfully.  It  is 
important  that  from  first  to  last  the  dog  be  kept  ignorant  of  what  he  is 
taking.     Once  bitten,  twice  shy  applies   here. 

So  the  pill  or  powder  must  be  well  concealed.  In  giving  a  liquid, 
instead  of  forcing  open  the  jaws  and  pouring  the  liquid  into  the  mouth, 
where  it  will  remain  and  half  choke  the  creature,  since  he  can  not  swallow 
while  his  mouth  is  wide  open,  it  is  much  better  to  use  the  lower  part  of  the 
lips  as  a  sort  of  funnel  and  slowly  pour  the  medicine  into  that,  when 
it  will  be  impossible  for  the  dog  to  avoid  swallowing  it. 

Many  fanciers — novices  that  is — experience  a  great  deal  of  trouble 
in  physicking  their  dogs,  simply  from  want  of  knowledge  of  how  to  go 
about  it,  and  it  often  happens  more  harm  is  done  to  the  dog  by  the  strug- 
gling and  fright  than  good  by  the  medicine;  and  not  only  so,  but  it  is  well 
nigh  impossible  to  give  a  proper  dose  unless  the  dog  is  kept  absolutely 
quiet,  and  that  only  can  be  when  either  the  medicine  is  tasteless  or  the 
administrator  of  it  skillful. 

If  a  person  wants  a  dog  for  a  pet  only,  he  can  make  a  pet  or  a  genial 
companion  of  any  of  the  recognized  breeds,  and  his  accomplishments  will 
only  be  limited  by  the  amount  of  companionship  and  education  granted 
him,  and  your  choice  should  be  based  simply  on  choosing  a  breed  you 
most  admire.  Your  choice  of  a  companion  rests  also  with  you.  Different 
men  admire  different  kinds  of  companions. 

Hot  Weather  on  Uogs. — Every  provision  should  be  made  during  the 
heated  season  to  protect  the  dogs,  especially  suckling  puppies.  Whereas  a 
dry  cellar  is  convenient,  it  is  a  good  plan  during  the  extreme  heat  of  the 
day  to  make  arrangements  for  their  comfort  in  this  cool  retreat. 

Particular  attention  should  be  paid  to  providing  cool  and  frequent 
changes  of  drinking  water.  Water  placed  in  porous  earthenware  pots 
will  be  found  to  keep  cooler  and  sweeter  than  in  metal  vessels,  and  these 
should  be  washed  out  thoroughly  every  day.  The  intelligent  kennel  man- 
ager will  always  provide  artificial  shade  in  kennel  yards  when  Nature  has 
not  done  so,  and  it  is  well  to  have  awnings  over  kennel  windows  and  doors. 
Exercise  only  during  the  early  morning  hours  and  in  the  evening,  the  rest 
of  the  day  let  the  dogs  lie  quietly.  In  arranging  kennels  it  is  always  a 
good  plan  to  build  the  kennel  floor  two  or  three  feet  from  the  ground. 
This  space  makes  an  admirable  retreat  in  hot  weather  and,  admitting  of 
a  free  current  of  air  at  all  times,  provided  the  kennels  are  built  on  a  natur- 
al drainage  slope,  there  is  no  fear  of  a  damp  kennel  floor  in  winter,  which, 
for  obvious  reasons,  is  a  serious  defect  in  kennel  architecture. 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  873 

During  very  hot  weather  it  would  be  well  to  remove  all  bedding  from 
under  litters  of  very  young  puppies.  Place  them  on  the  floor  so  the  air 
can  circulate  around  them.  During  this  trying  season  the  young  puppies, 
must  be  kept  as  cool  as  possible  or  they  will  go  under.  A  big  lump  of 
ice  placed  in  the  shade  of  the  window-sill  will  help  cool  the  atmosphere 
in  the  kennels. 

Care — Diet — Nursing. — Absolute  cleanliness,  an  unfailing  supply  of 
fresh  air,  a  suitable  temperature,  plenty  of  fresh  water,  general  comfort, 
and  last  but  not  least,  companionship  is  needed  by  a  sick  dog.  Locking 
a  dog  in  a  darkened  room  or  stall,  or  any  unaccustomed  change,  will  work 
havoc  with  a  sick  dog.  He  wants  to  see  his  master,  he  relies  upon  his 
companionship,  and  he  turns  to  him  as  if  to  a  god,  with  a  sublime  confi- 
dence in  his  master's  ability  to  help  him  in  his  difficulty.  A  word  of  ap- 
probation is  worth  more  to  his  nervous  system  than  drugs,  and  he  will 
frequently  eat  and  take  nourishment  simply  to  please  his  master. 

Dogs  have  sensitive  stomachs,  and  often,  as  a  result  of  indigestion, 
refuse  to  eat  altogether.  In  these  cases  this  is  Nature's  method  of  work- 
ing a  cure. 

If  the  dog  is  down  with  some  febrile  disorder  that  is  rapidly  weaken- 
ing him  it  is  important  that  he  take  some  nourishment.  Necessarily  it  must 
be  of  the  lightest  and  most  sustaining  character. 

Medical  practitioners  and  trained  nurses  have  brought  the  dietary  of 
the  sick  room  up  to  a  perfection  that  the  canine  practitioner  can  study 
with   good   results. 

There  are  a  number  of  predigested  foods  easy  of  preparation,  nour- 
ishing and  sustaining.  Milk,  mutton  broth,  gelatine  and  raw  eggs  are  val- 
uable foods.  Boiled  rice  is  easy  of  digestion.  Raw  beef  or  mutton,  minced 
or  chopped  fine,  fed  a  few  teaspoonfuls  at  a  time,  will  act  in  many  cases  as 
a  tonic  to  an  exhausted  stomach,  and  should  be  resorted  to,  as  there  is 
always  danger  of  a  disordered  stomach  rebelling  against  too  long  contin- 
ued liquid  food.  A  few  teaspoonfuls  of  brandy  or  port  wine  will  frequently 
cause  the  stomach  to  retain  food  that  would  otherwise  be  rejected.  It  is 
best  given  in  the  form  of  an  egg-nog  and  fed  a  few  teaspoonfuls  at  a  time. 

A  dog  will  eat  small  quantities  of  food  offered  from  his  master's  hand 
when  he  will  refuse  it  from  a  dish.  Do  not  allow  a  pan  of  food  to  remain 
before  him  after  he  has  declined  to  eat.  Remove  it  at  once  and  offer  it  at 
some   future  time. 

Conduct  of  Dogs  in  the  Show  King — Of  far  more  importance  than  is 
often  thought  to  be  the  case,  is  the  conduct  of  a  dog  when  before  the  judge. 
A  dog  to  be  seen  at  his  best  on  the  eventful  day  should  have  some  little 
preliminary  training.  It  is  one  thing  to  have  a  decent  specimen,  and  quite 
another  for  it  to  comport  itself  so  that  the  judge  can  take  in  at  a  glance, 
and  with  the  least  possible  delay,  the  chief  points.  A  dog  that  will  not 
show  itself  to  advantage  is  at  an  obvious  disadvantage  with  one  that  knows 
the  business  thoroughly,  and  whose  owner  is  able  to  display  all  his  strong 
points  without  unduly  exposing  his  weak  ones.  Old  show  hands  know 
this  very  well,  as  any  one  may  see  for  himself  by  watching  attentively 
the  expert  handlers  at  a  show  like  the  New  York  Show.  There  are  some 
judges  who  will  take  a  lot  of  pains  to  get  a  nervous  dog  to  show  himself, 
but  there  are  others,  having  heavy  classes  to  judge,  who  cannot  bestow  the 
time  necessary  to  get  each  individual  dog  in  the  best  humor  to  show 
himself. 

Such  being  the  case,  it  is,  too,  politic  of  an  owner  to  either  take  the 
dog  into  the  ring  himself,  or  else  leave  it  to  someone  who  is  an  expert  in  the 
business,  or  that  the  dog  knows  perhaps  as  well  as  its  owner.  All  owners 
cannot,  of  course,  keep  a  kennelman,  or  indeed,  accompany  their  charges; 
but  if  a  valuable  dog  is  being  shown  it  Is  not  wise  to  leave  it  to  a  perfect 
stranger  to  "handle"  the  animal.  There  are  a  number  of  expert  handlers 
at  every  show,  and  the  novice  that  has  a  good  dog  and  cannot  conven- 


$74  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING   DOGS. 

iently  attend  himself  would  find  it  to  pay  him  to  enlist  the  services  of  one 
of  these  professionals.  Where  there  is  no  one  deputized  to  act  the  part 
of  handler,  it  is  left  to  the  keepers  to  bring  in  the  dog.  Naturally  the  dog 
will  not  show  himself  for  these  men  as  it  would  for  its  owner  or  some 
one  fully  conversant  with  show  ring  business,  and  suffers  accordingly.  Dogs 
are  highly  sensitive  animals,  and  often  when  sent  away  without  any  previous 
preparation  look  and  really  are  dejected. 

The  person,  therefore,  who  aspires  to  be  an  exhibitor,  and  to  get  every 
advantage  possible  out  of  his  or  her  dog,  will  be  well  advised  to  rehearse 
a  few  times  the  actual  business  of  the  show  ring. 

Take  your  pups  out  into  the  road  early,  to  accustom  them  to  curious 
sights  and  sounds,  it  makes  all  the  difference  at  their  first  show. 

Accustom  them  to  follow  you  without  lead  early,  also  to  have  on  a 
collar,  and  to  lead  nicely.  This  cannot  be  done  in  a  field  or  garden  they 
know  well,  or  they  will  scream  and  crouch,  but  in  a  road  or  quiet  street 
they  will  pay  more  attention   to  you. 

I  would  particularly  impress  on  all  who  own  dogs — especially  young 
owners — that  it  is  not  only  to  their  interest,  but  it  is  their  duty  to  be  true 
masters,  ruling  with  firmness  and  kindness,  and  providing  for  all  the  wants 
of  the  animal  in  lodging,  food,  and  exercise  on  principles  of  common  sense; 
and  it  must  be  evident  that  thus  only  can  health  be  maintained.  If  a  dog 
have  not  proper  food  provided  at  proper  times,  but  be  allowed  to  be  the 
scavenger  of  the  yard  and  the  street,  what  wonder  if  he  become  loathsome 
and  diseased,  a  nuisance  to  his  owner  and  everyone  else?  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  he  be  pampered,  petted,  and  stuffed  with  tit-bits  and  sweet 
cakes,  he  will  lose  all  kindliness  of  disposition  (the  great  charm  of  a 
companion  dog),  and  become  a  morose,  peevish,  snappish  misanthrope,  that 
your  friends  may  praise,  but  dare  not  pat;  he  will  lose  all  beauty  of  form, 
all  sprightliness  and  elasticity  of  action  and  become  an  unshapely,  asthma- 
tical  lump  of  obesity,  to  whom  the  slightest  exertion  is  a  trouble.  Ladies, 
who  are  the  great  offenders  in  this  way  should  remember  that  dogs  are  not 
valued — like  prize  hogs — for  their  fatness,  and  that  they  are  never  so 
healthy  and  happy  as  when  in  good  working  condition — that  is,  when  they 
can  take  a  good  gallop  without  puffing. 


KENNEL    POINTS 


Don't  wash  a  bitch  while  in  season. 

Don't  breed  a  bitch  until  the  colored  discharge  has  ceased. 

Don't  breed  a  valuable  stud  dog  several  times  to  one  season.  One  ser- 
vice is  just  as  good  if  not  better  than  half  a  dozen. 

Don't  wash  the  bitch  while  in  whelp.  If  she  should  get  wet,  out  shoot- 
ing for  instance,  see  that  she  has  a  warm  bed  and  rug  her  down  before  she 
retires. 

Don't  give  your  dogs  hot  food;  it  is  not  natural,  injures  their  teeth 
and  leads  to  indigestion. 

Don't  prevent  a  bitch  that  is  in  whelp  from  eating  whatever  she 
pleases,  though  if  you  find  she  has  a  penchant  for  filthy  matter,  carrion  and 
other  flotsam  and  jetsam  of  the  street  let  her  have  her  way,  or  better  give 
her   sulphur  in   her   feed. 

Don't  send  your  bitches  into  water  while  in  whelp — at  any  rate  not 
after  the  fourth  week. 

Don't  keep  your  bitches  in  whelp  chained  up  or  kenneled  continually, 
they  should  have  plenty  of  gentle  walking  exercise  every  day,  especially 
the  last  three  weeks  before  whelping. 

Don't  neglect  to   feed  your  brood   bitches   with   every   food   that   will 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  275 

strengthen  and  stimulate  the  mother  in  the  trying  periods  of  pregnancy  and 
while  suckling  pups.  It  is  impossible  for  a  hen  to  cover  the  egg  meat  with 
hard  shell  unless  it  have  access  to  lime  and  other  shell  producing  matter. 
So  with  the  bitch;  when  her  puppies  are  required  to  show  bone  this  state 
is  greatly  aided  by  supplying  bone  producing  foods.  Precipitated  phosphate 
of  lime  should  be  given  to  the  bitch  in  her  food  during  the  last  weeks  of 
pregnancy  and  after  whelping  and  then  to  the  puppies  until  two  or  three 
months  old.     Half  a  teaspoonful  daily  to  a  pup  is  sufficient. 

Don't,  if  you  can  avoid  it,  keep  your  bitches  in  whelp  in  kennels  or 
jards  where  they  must  continually  jump  up  on  their  hind  legs  in  order  to 
lock  upon  thu  outer  world;  have  open  wire  or  slats  for  fencing  and  divis- 
ions. If  you  must  have  solid  partitions  build  them  so  high  that  the  bitch 
v  ill  never  attempt  to  jump  up  in  order  to  look  over.  More  puppies  are  slip- 
ped and  more  bitches  miss  from  this  abnormal  exercise  than  most  breed- 
ers  imagine. 

Don't  wash  a  dog  and  then  allow  it  to  run  around  and  dry  itself.  If 
you  take  enough  interest  in  the  dog  to  wash  it,  you  should  not  be  too  lazy 
to  dry  him  afterward. 

Don't  give  up  hope  of  a  sick  dog;  they  have  most  remarkable  recuper- 
ative powers  and  will  frequently  take  a  right  turn  when  least  expected. 

Don't  if  a  dog  is  doing  well  without  medicine,  force  it  on  him,  and, 
as  a  rule,  if  a  dog  is  resting  quietly  or  sleeping,  do  not  disturb  him  to  give 
him  medicine. 

Don't  in  buying  medicine,  be  satisfied  with  anything  but  the  very  best. 
Beware  of  cheap,  coarse  castor  oil,  adulterated  quinine  and  cod  liver  oil, 
and  it  may  also  be  stated  that  some  of  the  proprietary  medicines  on  the 
market  are  dangerous. 

Don't  guess  at  doses,   measure   them  carefully  and   if  the  medicine   is  ' 
to  be  given  at  night  keep  the  dog  confined   until  morning. 

Don't  expect  a  puppy  to  know  as  much  as  an  adult  dog. 

Don't  keep  a  dog  unless  you  are  fond  of  it.  , 

Don't  expect  to  house-break  a  pup  in  a  week. 

Dcr't  ill-use  him  because  he  does  not  understand  you. 

Don't  wait  too  long  to  break  him  to  chain  and  collar. 

Don't  think  that  a  dog  has  no  likes  or  dislikes. 

Don't  whip  him  if  he  barks  at  a  stranger,  and  never  kick  your  dog. 

Don't  allow  him  to  have  his  own  way,  but  be  firm  and  determined  with 
him,  using  only  enough  punishment  to  control  him,  if  you  can't  accomplish 
it  by  talking  to  him. 

Don't  allow  your  dog  to  stray  too  far  from  you  in  the  streets,  and 
make  him  obedient  to  call. 

Don't  allow  him  to  cross  the  street  unless  he  Is  near  to  you  for  fear 
of  being  run  over  by  an  auto  or  street  car. 

Don't  be  afraid  to  give  your  dog  plenty  of  exercise. 

Don't  feed  him  around   the   table. 

Don't  give  him  chicken  bones;   they  are  dangerous. 

Don't  ignore  his  instincts  and  think  that  he  can  live  on  starchy  foods 
alone. 

Don't  entertain  the  false  notion   that  meat  produces   fits   or  mange. 

Don't  give  him  a  taste  for  candies. 

Don't  worry  over  every  little  thing  that  appears  to  be  out  of  the  or- 
dinary in  your  dog.  There  are  days  when  you  don't  feel  well,  and  don't 
feel  like  playing.     It's  the  same  with  a  dog. 

Don't  treat  your  dogs   as   so   many  animals   that  have   to   be   fed   and 
housed.     We  cannot  understand  keeping  dogs  under  such  conditions.     Han- 
dle your  dogs,   make   friends   with   them,   because   they  are   dogs.      A  man  ' 
need  never  be  ashamed  of  loving  a  dog. 

Don't  lose  your  temper  and   kick  a  dog.     The  dog  is  apt  to  consider  . 
the  kicking  leg  an   enemy,  and   treat  it  as  such,  and  this  may  be  uncom- 
fortable for  you.     Besides,  a  kick  in  passion  may  do  an  irreparable  injury 
to  the  dog.     If  a  whip  must  be  used,  a  thin  rawhide  is  the  best;   it  hurts 
and  breaks  no  bones,  and  you  can  control  it  better  than  a  whiplash. 


276  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

Don't  wait  until  disease  has  gotten  so  secure  a  hold  that  it  cannot  be 
quickly  eradicated.  This  is  a  weakness  characteristic  of  a  great  many  dog- 
owners.  The  "go  off  and  eat  grass  and  get  well"  theory  doesn't  hold  good 
in  this  latter  day  civilization. 

Don't  administer  liquids  to  dogs  while  the  mouth  is  open.  Close  the 
mouth  tightly,  hold  the  hand  over  his  nose  and  lower  jaw,  and  by  making 
a  funnel  of  the  side  lips,  keep  the  head  erect  and  pour  the  liquid  through 
the  teeth. 

Don't  because  you  can  trust  your  house  pet  not  to  abuse  your  confi- 
dence, keep  him  shut  up  in  the  house  for  hours.  Some  dogs  are  so  refined 
in  their  habits  that  they  will  suffer  agonies  rather  than  take  advantage 
of  your  thoughtfulness. 

Don't  forget  that  where  a  number  of  dogs  are  kept,  regularity  and 
system  should  prevail.  Insist  that  your  kennelman  have  a  certain  hour 
for  exercising,  grooming,  and  especially  feeding.  Slip-shod  methods  are 
just  as  productive  of  non-success  in  dog-breeding  as  in  any  other  business 
undertaking.  With  regular  hours  for  different  work,  the  dogs  become  set- 
tled in  their  habits,  are  not  continually  restless  and  on  the  move;  con- 
sequently there  is  little  noise  and  the  neighbors  are  not  disturbed. 

Don't,  if  you  can  help  it,  cook  the  kennel  food  in  the  same  building 
occupied  by  the  dogs.  The  aroma  of  cooking  unsettles  them  and  the  spirit 
of  anxious  expectancy  is  often  the  forerunner  of  a  fight,  when  a  number 
of  dogs  are  kept  in  one  compartment. 

Don't  feed  cornmeal  day  in  and  day  out,  as  many  kennelmen  unfor- 
tunately do.  It  is  handy  to  cook  and  cheap,  you  say.  It  may  be,  but  its 
constant  use  heats  the  blood,  lowers  the  system  and  eczema  and  mange 
too  often  follow  as  a  natural  consequence.     Never  feed  it  in  hot  weather. 

Don't  allow  your  very  young  puppies  to  run  with  the  old  dogs.  Be- 
sides the  danger  from  injury  in  romping  with  heavier  dogs  there  is  also 
a  danger  of  the  older  dogs  snapping  at  the  youngsters  and  giving  them 
a  nip  that  will  scare  the  life  out  of  them  for  a  week  or  longer. 

Don't,  in  your  eagerness  to  show  off  the  gameness  of  some  two  or 
three  months  old  terrier  enter  him  at  a  rat.  A  nip  from  the  rodent,  that 
he  does  not  understand,  will  sometimes  ruin  a  very  young  dog  for  future 
ratting. 

Don't  throw  a  dog  into  water  because  he  does  not  plunge  in  at  com- 
mand. If  you  do,  ten  to  one  you  will  spoil  his  future  as  a  water  dog. 
Coax  him  to  walk  in  by  degrees,  but  better  still,  if  possible,  let  him  see 
some  other  dog  swim  out  for  the  stick;  if  not  an  inveterate  coward  he  will 
soon  enter  into  the  fun  of  the  thing — and   the  water. 

Don't  feed  liver  and  lights  to  your  dogs  if  you  value  their  health.  Such 
Btuff  may  fill  an  aching  void  for  the  time  being,  but  there  is  no  flesh  pro- 
ducing substance  in  it.  The  liver  will  disarrange  the  internals  and  you 
may  as  well  feed  so  much  sponge  as  the  leathery  indigestible  lights. 

Don't  forget  the  bones.  Dogs  kept  in  kennels  have  not  as  a  rule  a  very 
merry  time  of  it  at  best  and  a  good  big  knuckle  bone  will  serve  to  while 
away  an  odd  hour  or  two,  besides  cleaning  the  teeth  and  inducing  a  healthy 
flow  of  saliva.     But  use  discretion,  avoiding  chicken  bones  and  small  bones. 

Don't  throw  in  one  bone  for  two  dogs.  Reason  obvious. .  Neither  give 
a  bone  to  bitches  suckling  or  running  with  puppies.  The  maternal  instinct 
is  strong  but  the  mother  while  gnawing  the  bone  is  not  to  be  depended 
upon  and  may  give  a  too  venturesome  and  confiding  puppy  an  ugly  bite. 

Don't  provide  high  sleeping  benches  for  bitches  in  whelp,  the  lower 
the  better  so  that  they  may  be  no  danger  of  incurring  a  strain  which  may 
cause  a  miscarriage.  Have  the  entrance  to  the  brood  bitch  kennel  as  wide 
as  possible  and  easy  of  access,  with  no  corners  to  run  round,  when  running 
in  or  out  in  a  hurry  the  bitch  is  liable  to  bump  herself.  And  above  all 
things  avoid  swinging  doors. 

Don't  neglect  ventilation  in  the  kennels.  Arrange  this  so  that  there 
is  no  direct  draught  on  the  dogs.  A  good  plan  is  to  have  openings  under 
tie  eaves  of  the  kennel  and  inside  nail  a  board  the  size  of  the  aperture 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING.  DOGS.  27T 

but  slanting  inwards  at  an  angle  of  45  degrees  so  that  the  air  is  direct©* 
to  the  top  of  the  kennel  first. 

Don't  feed  raw  meat  to  a  dog  suffering  from  diarrhea.  Feed  starchy 
foods.  A  good  stiff  gruel  of  flour  and  water  will  often  stop  the  complaint 
in   early  stages. 

Don't  think  that  your  duty  is  done  when  you  have  provided  kennel 
runs  for  your  dogs.  This  fact  will  not  always  answer  the  exercising  pur- 
pose. The  dogs  will  probably  lie  around  and  take  a  toddle  now  and  again, 
but  no  real  exercise.  Therefore  they  should  be  given  opportunity  for  a 
scamper  at  least  once  a  day.  This  is  always  feasible  in  the  country  and 
really  no  dogs  should  be  kept  in  the  city,  except  household  pets,  and  these 
can  always  be  given  a  run  when  you  walk,  if  you  care  to  take  the  trouble 
■ — some  people  don't,  and  the  dogs  suffer. 

Don't  allow  the  kennel  yards  to  become  littered  with  manure.  Besides 
being  unhealthy  and  a  source  of  worms,  the  manure  is  a  saleable  commo- 
dity and  should  be  regularly  taken  up,  dried  and  sold  to  the  morocco 
leather  dressers.  The  bones  that  accumulate  around  a  kennel  can  also  be 
disposed  of.     All  these  little  things  count  in  the  conduct  of  a  large  kennel. 

Don't  feed  scraps  from  the  table  without  carefully  looking  them  over 
before  doing  so.  In  the  dog's  eagerness  after  dainties  he  may  swallow  a 
hidden  fish  bone,  chicken  bone  splinter  or  other  pointed  substance  that  may 
cause  trouble  afterwards.  Also  don't  feed  highly  seasoned  messes  that 
come  from  the  table  just  because  they  are  handy  and  the  dog  will  eat  them. 
It  will  cost  you  less  in  the  long  run  to  feed  sound  wholesome  dog  food. 

Don't  use  the  whip  for  every  little  mistake  your  dog  makes.  Dogs  are 
not  like  lions  in  a  cage,  to  be  subdued  by  a  show  of  force.  Talk  to  the  dog 
and  prove  to  him  by  action  and  expression  that  he  has  done  wrong.  A  dog 
follows  his  master's  expression  more  than  you  may  think  he  does.  Kind- 
ness and   firmness  accomplish   more   than   the  lash. 

Don't  lose  your  temper  and  kick  a  dog.  The  dog  is  apt  to  consider 
the  kicking  leg  an  enemy  and  treat  it  as  such,  and  this  may  be  uncomforta- 
ble for  you.  Besides  a  kick  in  passion  may  do  an  irreparable  injury  to  the 
dog.  If  a  whip  must  be  used  a  thin  rawhide  is  the  best;  it  hurts  and  breaks 
no  bones,  and  you  can  control  it  better  than  a  whip  lash. 

Don't  enter  a  kennel  without  speaking  to  the  dogs,  and  especially  so  at 
night,  or  in  the  dark.  The  magic  power  of  the  voice  may  save  you  from  a 
bite.  When  meeting  a  strange  dog  always  greet  him  kindly.  A  soft  word 
will  answer  better  than  your  boot.  And  don't  thrink  from  a  dog  that  jumps 
or  runs  toward  you,  this  is  an  exhibition  of  fear  that  he  is  apt  to  take  advan- 
tage of,  and  above  all  things  don't  run  away  from  him. 

Don't  fail  to  frequently  examine  your  dog's  mouth.  Teeth  may  become 
loose,  and  thereby  interfere  with  his  eating;  tartar  may  form  when  sloppy, 
unsuitable  food  is  given,  and  especially  in  the  case  of  pet  dogs,  lap  dogs, 
and  so  forth,  that  are  fed  not  wisely  but  too  well,  and  this  should  be  either 
brushed  away  or  scraped.  Small  slivers  of  bone  are  apt  to  run  in  between 
the  gum  and  tooth;  if  not  removed,  the  gum  will  ulcerate  and  become  very 
painful,  preventing  the  dog  from  eating,  and  while  in  this  off-of-feed  con- 
dition, you  may  deem  it  proper  to  doctor  him  for  some  imaginary  illness 
when  a  little  examination  would  show  you  the  cause  of  the  trouble. 

Don't  exercise  your  dog  after  a  meal,  nor  yet  just  before  it.  How 
would  you  like  to  run  half  a  mile  after  a  good  feed? 

Don't  feed  sloppy  food  to  the  dogs;  that  soft  of  stuff  may  be  all  right 
to  fill  pigs  with,  but  a  dog's  grinders  were  made  for  something  more 
substantial.  If  you  are  a  father  you  will  know  it  is  customary  to  give 
teething  babies  something  to  use  their  gums  on.  Puppies  are  four-legged 
babies,  and  they  require  similar  treatment  when  teething.  Chuck  the  puppy 
a  bone  or  a  biscuit  and  that  will  help  the  grinders  along. 

Don't  think  because  you  know  what  you  wish  your  dog  to  do  that 
he  can  grasp  your  meaning  off-hand  and  without  effort  on  your  part;  dogs 
are  intelligent,  but  they  are  not  clairvoyants. 

Don't  buy  drugs  in  great  quantities  as  they  become  inert  or  greatly 
deteriorate  by  keeping,  especially  when  exposed  to  light  and  air;  therefor*, 


278  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

buy  such  drugs  only  in  quantities  for  immediate  use,  and  from  those  whose 
judgment  in  selection  and  whose  fair  dealing  can  be  depended  on. 

Don't  treat  your  dogs  as  simply  so  many  animals  that  have  to  be  fed 
and  housed.  We  can  not  understand  keeping  dogs  under  such  conditions. 
Handle  your  dogs,  make  friends  with  them,  because  they  are  dogs.  A  man 
need  never  be  ashamed  of  loving  a  dog.  The  dog's  whole-souled  look  of 
affection  will  repay  the  man  of  feeling  for  all  the  trouble  he  may  put  himself 
to  in  this  direction,  and  it  will  last  longer  than  a  good  many  other  loves.  If 
you  want  to  win  prizes  with  them,  accustom  them  to  being  handled  and 
to  show  themselves  off  to  the  best  advantage.  Nothing  makes  an  owner 
look  so  foolish  as  to  try  and  show  a  dog  that  does  not  know  him  or  that 
is  "contrary."  A  good  puppy  is  often  placed  back  because  he  is  taken 
into  the  ring  without  any  thought  of  preparation  for  the  trying  ordeal. 
Accustom  your  dogs  to  being  shown  up  in  collar  and  chain.  They  soon 
grasp  the  idea,  for  there  is  vanity  in  dogs  as  well  as  human  beings. 

Don't  wash  puppies  when  they  are  very  young,  unless  they  happen  to 
get  into  some  filth  that  can  not  be  removed  when  dry  by  the  brush.  Don't 
wash  puppies  until  at  least  six  months  old.  Grooming  and  "elbow  grease" 
every  day  will  improve  the  coat  and  do  more  good  than  washing. 

Don't  let  your  pup,  or  pups,  get  into  the  habit  of  barking  violently, 
a  most  tiresome  trick,  coming  of  idleness  and  not  enough  out  door  exer- 
cise, and  also  sometimes  hereditary. 

Scold  them,  and  keep  a  switch  in  the  corner,  for  a  nip  now  and  then; 
they  will  soon  pay  attention. 


BREEDING 


breeding — This  article  was  written  by  Harry  W.  Lacy,  Kennel  Editor 
of  American  Fancier,  especially  for  this  book: 

"Young  bitches  often  exhibit  symptoms  of  an  inclination  to  breed  at 
the  age  of  eight  or  nine  months,  but  it  is  not  advisable  to  do  so  until  they 
have  come  in  season  the  second  time.  Remarks  we  made  last  week  against 
the  advisability  of  resorting  to  the  services  of  too  young  a  sire  apply  with 
even  greater  force  when  a  youthful  bitch  is  under  consideration.  Stunted 
and  puny  puppies  are  almost  sure  to  be  produced  from  a  young  mother; 
and  the  injury  they  are  likely  to  do  her  constitution  is  incalculable.  It 
must  be  borne  in  mind  that  for  weeks  before  birth  her  system  is  sorely 
taxed  to  provide  them  with  nourishment,  and  after  the  shock  of  labor  is 
gone  through  there  is  further  strain  upon  her  until  they  are  weaned. 

"The  first  symptoms  afforded  by  a  bitch  that  she  is  likely  to  be  soon 
ready  for  breeding  purposes  is  a  desire  on  her  part  to  romp  and  play  with 
any  dog  she  meets.  This  may  possibly  arise  from  merely  exuberance  of 
spirits,  but  it  is  always  well  to  keep  a  close  eye  upon  her  as  soon  as  any 
undue  levity  is  observed  in  her  conduct.  It  is  most  desirable  to  use  every 
endeavor  to  keep  the  animal  away  from  all  risk  of  being  got  at  by  strange 
dogs;  and  when  the  matter  is  placed  beyond  doubt  all  former  precautions 
should  be  doubled  if  possible.  It  must  be  remembered  that  there  is  not  only 
a  great  risk  of  dogs  getting  into  the  place  where  the  bitch  is  confined,  but 
that  she  will  probably  be  equally  anxious  to  escape  from  her  kennel,  and 
some  bitches  have  performed  almost  incredible  feats  in  their  endeavors  to 
do  so. 

"She  should,  if  at  a  distance,  be  sent  off  to  the  kennels  where  the 
dog  is  standing,  a  day  or  two  after  the  earlier  symptoms  appear,  so  as  to 
be  In  time.  If  despatched  by  public  conveyance,  it  is  imperative  that  she 
be  securely  confined  in  a  box  or  basket  from  which  escape  is  impossible. 
AH  breeders  should  be  impressed  with  the  absolute  necessity  of  exercising 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  27ft 

the  greatest  vigilance  when  they  have  bitches  by  them  under  such  cir- 
cumstances. For  several  days  after  the  bitch  has  visited  the  dog,  the  pre- 
cautions for  isolating  her  must  not  be  relaxed,  or  all  her  owner's  hopes 
may  be  marred  by  her  forming  a  connection  with  a  stranger. 

"Having  selected  a  proper  mate  for  his  bitch,  and  sent  her  to  him,  all 
anxiety  is  removed  from  an  owner's  mind  for  some  time  at  least;  for  dur- 
ing the  first  period  of  going  with  young,  the  bitch  will  require  no  special 
diet  or  attention.  During  the  latter  portion  of  her  pregnancy  she  is  pecu- 
liarly liable  to  chills;  every  care  should  therefore  be  taken  to  avoid  any 
risk  of  her  taking  cold,  and  all  washing  operations  and  violent  exercise 
must  then  be  suspended.  Our  own  experience  has  taught  us  that  in  the 
majority  of  instances  it  is  almost  impossible  to  tell  whether  or  no  the  bitch 
is  in  whelp  until  the  third  or  fourth  week,  and  on  many  occasions  we 
have  known  breeders  to  be  in  doubt  for  a  much  longer  period. 

"A  week  or  so  before  the  date  on  which  it  is  expected  that  she  will 
whelp,  the  bitch  should  be  installed  in  the  quarters  in  which  it  is  arrang- 
ed the  interesting  event  is  to  take  place.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  dogs 
must  get  used  to  a  kennel  before  they  will  make  themselves  at  home  in  it, 
and  this  feeling  is  peculiarly  perceptible  in  the  case  of  a  bitch  who  has 
recently  whelped;  for  in  many  cases  she  will  try  and  carry  her  puppies 
(greatly  to  the  damage  of  the  latter)  back  to  her  old  quarters  rather  than 
let  them  remain  in  a  kennel  to  which  she  is  unaccustomed.  Having  got 
her  reconciled  to  her  change  of  abode,  the  locale  of  which  should,  if  possible, 
be  away  from  the  other  dogs,  so  as  to  let  her  have  more  quiet  (but  warmth 
and  absence  of  draught  are  even  more  essential  than  isolation  in  most 
cases),  and  supposing  the  time  of  her  whelping  to  be  near  at  hand,  it  is 
desirable  that  the  bitch  should  be  provided  with  a  diet  of  a  more  strength- 
ening character  than  that  which  she  has  been  in  the  habit  of  receiving. 
This  need  not  consist  entirely  of  meat  or  other  heating  foods,  which  can 
only  tend  to  increase  her  discomfort  in  parturition,  but  may  be  made  of 
scraps  well  boiled  or  stewed,  with  the  addition  of  bread,  meal,  or  rice,  which 
in  their  turn  will  absorb  the  gravy  or  soup  and  form,  in  conjunction  with 
the  scraps,  when  the  latter  are  chopped  up,  a  meal  which  is  both  whole- 
some and  nutritious.  A  few  days  before  the  puppies  make  their  appear- 
ance a  considerable  change  is  usually  perceptible  in  the  bitch;  the  pres- 
ence of  milk  can  be  detected  and  a  considerable  enlargement  of  the  stomach 
takes  place.  Her  behavior,  too,  clearly  indicates  that  she  is  uneasy  and  in 
pain,  and  in  many  instances  the  appetite  entirely  fails,  and  the  bowels 
become  confined.  In  the  latter  case  a  mild  purgative  of  either  castor, 
linseed  or  sweet  oil  must  be  given.  The  first-named  remedy  is  sometimes 
too  powerful  an  aperient  for  a  bitch  in  such  a  condition,  as,  in  the  more 
delicate  breeds  especially,  it  is  apt  to  cause  severe  straining,  which  would 
injure  the  puppies.  Before  resorting,  therefore,  to  castor  oil,  an  experimen- 
tal dose  of  either  linseed  or  sweet  oil  might  be  administered,  which,  if  it 
succeeds  in  acting  on  the  bowels,  will  have  satisfactorily  accomplished  the 
owner's  object;  and  as  the  lubricating  power  of  all  three  oils  is  essentially 
the  same,  the  internal  organs  will  be  equally  benefited  by  either  medi- 
cine." 

It  is  a  good  plan  to  treat  the  brood  bitch  thoroughly  for  worms  be- 
fore being  put  to  the  dog;  and  stud  dogs  should  be  periodically  treated  for 
these  pests. 


280  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 


FEEDING  PUPPIES 


Special  article  written  by  Harry  W.  Lacy,  Editor  American  Fancier: 

If  you  were  to  ask  the  average  dog  owner,  who  in  the  course  of  a  year 
raises  some  puppies,  what  he  gives  the  puppies  when  weaning,  the  answer 
would,  nine  times  out  of  ten,  be — "Oh,  milk  and  bread,  or  milk  and  oat- 
meal— something  of  that  sort."  Yes,  its  just  this  something  of  that  sort 
that  does  the  mischief,  and  to  add  to  the  trouble  he  adds  water  to  the 
milk,  usually.  Right  off  the  mother  the  pups  are  asked  at  the  most  critical 
time  of  their  lives  to  make  good  on  a  diet  that  contains  much  less  nourish- 
ment than  they  enjoyed  with  mamma.  We  have  always  been  interested  in 
the  common  sense  methods  as  advised  by  "Great  Dane"  in  his  "Dog  Feeding 
Up-To-Date,"  and  especially  in  his  insistence  on  a  familiar  topic  of  advice  in 
these  columns  whenever  we  get  the  chance  and  that  is — feed  the  bitch. 

The  proper  feeding  of  puppies  is  at  first  effected  by  properly  feeding 
the  dam;  and  it  must  needs  be  commenced  before  their  birth,  since,  if  the 
bearing  mother  be  underfed,  improperly  sheltered,  over-exercised  or  other- 
Wise  neglected  or  overtaxed,  the  puppies  naturally  come  into  the  world 
starvelings,  seldom  capable  of  repaying  their  breeder  for  the  cost  and 
worry  of  rearing  them.  If,  however,  the  bitch  be  kept  in  vigorous  condi- 
tion with  good  food  and  good  care,  her  puppies  are  ensured  an  ample  store 
of  nourishment  whereon  to  draw  for  the  development  of  their  bodies  and 
constitutions.  They  are  born  strong  and  healthy,  and  soon  commence  to 
suck;  and  with  even  fairly  good  management  there  is  little  risk  of  losing 
such  puppies.  Weaklings,  on  the  other  hand,  frequently  require  consider- 
able care  and  attention  to  raise.  The  great  points  at  the  outset  are,  of 
course,  to  get  them  to  suck  within  an  hour  or  so  of  birth  and  to  prevent 
their  being  chilled,  so  that  such  as  are  too  feeble  to  reach  and  pull  at  the 
teats  must  be  helped  as  often  as  seems  needful,  some  of  the  milk  being 
pressed  out  with  the  finger  and  thumb.  Nothing  is  so  well  calculated  to 
make  very  young  puppies  grow  strongly  and  vigorously  as  a  bountiful  sup- 
ply of  their  mother's  milk,  which,  in  general,  supplies  everything  required 
for  their  proper  nourishment.  Any  bitch  capable  of  nursing  her  puppies 
should  be  made  to  do  so.  To  needlessly  deny  a  puppy  its  dam's  milk  and  to 
substitute  artificial  means  of  subsistence  is  to  deprive  it  of  the  best  safe- 
guard of  its  life.  The  first  milk  or  colostrum  is  laxative  in  character,  and 
so  assists  in  removing  from  their  bodies  waste  matters  accumulated  before 
birth.  Hence,  if  for  some  reason  or  other  they  do  not  get  this  first  milk, 
it  is  wise  to  give  each  a  drop  or  two  of  castor  oil  in  warm  milk  instead. 

Where  it  becomes  necessary  to  substitute  cow's  milk  for  that  of  the 
dam,  it  is,  as  previously  explained,  essential  to  make  it  as  similar  as  pos- 
sible in  composition  and  richness  to  the  milk  the  puppies  would  naturally 
obtain.  It  is  apparent  that  the  milk  of  the  bitch  is  about  thrice  as  rich  in 
protein  and  fat  as  is  that  of  the  cow,  so  that,  if  we  propose  to  use  cow's 
milk  for  puppies,  we  must  correspondingly  increase  its  protein  and  fat. 

This  can  be  approximately  done  by  heating  the  milk  until  some  two- 
thirds  of  its  volume  have  evaporated.  No  nutrients  are  lost,  only  water 
being  given  off,  so  that  the  result  is  a  concentrated  milk  thrice  as  rich  as 
ordinary  cow's  milk.  A  better  and  more  convenient  plan  is  to  add  to  each 
half-pint  of  fresh  cow's  milk  two  to  two-and-a-half  ounces  of  full-cream 
milk^powder.  The  concentrated  milk-food  thus  prepared  is  approximately 
thrice  as  strong  as  cow's  milk,  so  that  puppies  only  require  one-third  as 
much  of  it.  At  3  weeks  old  the  following  quantities  are  appropriate: 
Toy  puppies,  1  teaspoonful;  Fox-terrier-sized  puppies,  1  desertspoonful; 
.Collie-sized  puppies,  g   teaspoonfuls;   and   largest-breed   puppies,  a   table- 


It  affords  me  great  pleas- 
ure to  now  call  your  at- 
tention to 


MY  ADVERTISERS 


Selected  from  the  leading  kennels  only — and 
quite  important  to  dog-interested  people  to 
know  where  a  dog  of  the  right  sort  can  be 
bought  at  a  right  price — from  the  right 
people.  Every  one  of  them  will  treat  you  square.  Most  of  them 
I  know  personally,  and  in  ordering,  you  can,  with  perfect 
safety,  send  the  money  with  the  order  (not  necessary  to  have 
the  dog  sent  on  approval),  for  they  will  ship  you  a  dog  ex- 
actly as  represented — that  will  please  and  satisfy  you. 

Read  the  Advertisements! 

THEY  ARE  ALSO  VALUABLE. 

With  a  feeling  of  pride,  I  now  introduce  to  your  notice  the 
most  select  lot  of  advertisements  that  have  ever  appeared  in 

a  Dog  Book.  AL.  G.  EBERHART 

PLEASE  MENTION  THIS  BOOK  WHEN  WRITING. 

CANINE  BOARDING  HOUSE 

DOGS    TAKEN     TO     BOARD 

TERMS — $7  to  $10  per  month,  according  to  size — 

PAYABLE  IN  ADVANCE. 

NO  DOGS  TAKEN  SUFFERING  WITH  DISTEMPER  OR 

MANGE. 
CAN  TAKE  ECZEMA  CASES  TO  TREAT  AT  FIFTY  CENTS 

PER    DAY — MEDICINES    CHARGED    EXTRA. 
OUR   Kennels   are    beautifully    located    on    the    Little    Miami 
River,   at  Camp   Dennison,   Ohio,   sixteen  miles  out  of 
Cincinnati,  forty  minutes'  ride  on  the  Penna.  R.  R. 

We  have  large  grounds,  seventeen  individual  yards,  en- 
closed by  high  and  secure  fences.  Sleeping  kennel  in  each  of 
these  yards,  the  yards  opening  to  a  large  paddock,  where  all 
dogs  are  given  exercise  three  times  a  day.  Plenty  of  shade 
and  grass,  and  everything  conducive  to  health,  happiness  and 
safety  of  dogs. 

While  same  care  is  given  each  dog  as  if  it  were  our  own, 
yet  we  assume  no  responsibility  as  to  accidents.  Dogs  are  at 
owner's  risk. 

VISITORS  ALWAYS  WELCOME,  BUT  PREFER  VISITS  BY 
APPOINTMENT. 

THE  EBERHART  KENNELS,  camp  dennison,  ohio. 

CINCINNATI  OFFICE.  23  EAST  SIXTH  STREET. 


282  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

spoonful.  These  quantities  may  be  given  5  or  6  times  a  day  in  addition 
to  the  mother's  milk,  and  may  be  slowly  increased  as  necessary. 

For  breeds  in  which  small  size  is  essential,  as,  for  instance,  in  terriers 
and  toys,  concentrated  puppy  foods  must  be  used  with  caution  and  not 
continued  longer  than  is  necessary,  lest  they  make  the  dogs  grow  too  big. 
Improved  nourishment  necessarily  implies  increased  bodily  development; 
and  one  of  the  most  successful  and  observant  breeders  of  Scottish  terriers 
recently  told  the  writer  that  he  has  had  to  altogether  abandon  the  use 
of  such  foods  because  they  made  his  dogs  grow  too  big. 

Little  puppies  fed  upon  plain  cow's  milk  have  either  to  go  short  of 
proper  nourishment  or  to  overtax  their  stomachs  by  loading  them  with 
about  thrice  the  bulk  of  food  for  which  they  have  natural  capacity.  Viewed 
from  this  standpoint,  the  plight  of  poor  little  wretches  fed  on  diluted 
cow's  milk  is  evil  indeed.  We  have  all  of  us  seen  puppies  grudgingly  al- 
lowed just  enough  nourishment  to  live  upon  until  they  are  able  to  take 
care  of  themselves — poor,  sunken-eyed,  half-starved  little  creatures  that 
do  somehow  manage  to  pull  through  on  bread  and  watered  milk,  on  which 
they  gorge  themselves  when  they  get  a  chance  until  it  is  a  marvel  they  do 
not  burst  and  thus  end  their  miserable  existence.  No  wonder  that  such 
of  them  as  struggle  through  to  maturity  make  small,  pot-bellied  dogs.  It 
is  the  worst  possible  policy  to  breed  good  puppies  and  then  starve  them. 


SEPERATING  DOGS  WHEN  FIGHTING 


One  dog  supposed  to  have  a  hold  on  the  other  dog,  generally  the  case, 
so  I  give  this  as  a  sample.  A  pail  of  water  will  in  many  cases  make  the 
dog  let  go — for  a  minute  or  less,  but  in  some  breeds,  as  Bull  terriers,  or 
Airedale  terriers,  this  will  not  work.  You  might,  if  strong  enough  in  the 
hand,  choke  the  one  dog  off,  but  in  cases  of  Bull  terriers  I  have  failed, 
if  you  had  a  bottle  of  amonia  right  there,  this  would  make  any  dog  let  go — 
for  a  minute  or  so  only,  if  it  was  a  Bull  terrier.  What  will  make  any  dog 
let  go  is  a  lit  cigar  held  to  his  nose,  or,  a  burning  match  may  do  if  no  lit 
cigar  is  handy.  The  trouble  now  comes  up,  after  separated,  that  one  or 
both  dogs  will  get  right  at  it  again,  and  here  is  where  you  must  have  a 
level  head,  and  your  nerve,  to  prevent  this.  One  person  alone  will  have  a 
contract  on  his  hands,  but  if  there  happens  to  be  some  other  sensible 
man  there  to  assist,  each  one  of  you  grab  a  dog  by  his  collar,  or,  if  no 
collar  on  dog,  then  by  the  nap  of  his  neck,  and  hold  your  dog  back.  I  have 
separated  dogs  alone,  by  holding  each  one  apart  at  arms  length,  but  it's 
quite  a  job.  A  dog  can't  bite  you,  if  you  keep  your  head,  not  afraid  or 
scared  yourself,  when  you  have  a  firm  hold  on  his  collar,  on  top  of  his  neck, 
or  by  the  nap  of  his  neck,  on  top.  Neither  dog  in  the  fight  is  wanting  to 
bite  you — it's  the  other  dog  he  is  after. 

Now  see  In  this  book,  "Bites,"  as  to  how  to  treat  them  if  dog  is 
bitten,  or  you  might  be. 


DISFECTANTS 


A  disinfectant  is  important  to  health  and  absolutely  necessary  in  ev- 
ery kennel.     All  bench  shows  use  some  disinfectant  of  which  there  are 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  283 

several  good  ones.  Carbolic  Acid  has  been  used  by  many,  but  great  care 
must  be  taken  to  use  it,  properly  diluted  and  not  too  strong,  or  harm  will 
come  from  it.  Chloride  of  Lime  is  also  used,  but  to  some  people  it  is  very 
offensive  because  of  its  odor,  and  if  used  should  be  properly  mixed. 

A  much  safer  and  better  plan  is  to  use  one  that  is  especially  and  pro- 
perly compounded  for  the  purpose,  by  experts — then  you  are  safe. 

Standard  Disinfectant,  made  by  The  Standard  Disinfectant  Co.,  of 
Perry,  Ohio,  (see  their  advertisement),  is  one  that  I  have  used  for  years, 
exclusively,  and  it  is,  in  my  opinion,  as  good  as  any — and  my  choice,  having 
tried  several  others,  that  are  also  good.  I  prefer  to  use  it  in  its  crude 
form,  properly  diluted  with  water.  For  particulars  see  their  advertisement 
in  this  book.  Standard  Disinfectant  is  a  good  thing,  safe,  reliable  and  a 
perfect  disinfectant.  You  will  be  satisfied  and  pleased  from  the  results 
of  using  it.  It  is  very  reasonable  in  price,  this  quite  an  important  item  as 
well.    In  having  my  kennels  scrubbed,  I  use  it  pretty  strong  in  the  hot  water. 

Table  for  Mixing  Standard  Oil  of  Tar. 

%  Teaspoonful  Standard  Oil  of  Tar  in  Tumbler  of  Water  is  1  part  to 


100. 


1  Teaspoonful  in  Pint  of  Water  is  1  to  100. 
%   Pint  to  6  Gallons  of  Water  is  1  to  100. 
1  Pint  to  12  Gallons  of  Water  is  1  to  100. 
It  will  be  easy  to  get  other  proportions  by  using  this  as  a  base. 


DRUGS 


Acetic  Acid.— '-Used  in  making  Mindererous'  spirit,  which  enters  into 
fever  mixture,  distemper  mixture,  etc.;  also  as  a  cooling  lotion,  combined 
with  sal  ammoniac  and  spirit,  for  application  to  swellings  and  bruises,  to 
reduce  local  inflammation  where  the  skin  is  not  broken. 

Cooling  Lotion. — The  following  is  the  formula:  Take  sal  ammoniac  4 
ounces,  strong  acetic  acid  10  ounces,  boiling  water  10  ounces,  methylated 
spirit  2  ounces.  Powder  the  sal  ammoniac  and  dissolve  in  the  boiling  water 
and  acetic  acid,  and  add  the  spirit. 

Before  applying  the  lotion  it  must  be  mixed  with  eight  or  ten  parts  of 
cold  water,  and  the  part  kept  constantly  wetted  with  it  until  heat,  pain  and 
other  inflammatory  symptoms  have  disappeared.  N.  B. — An  intermittent 
use  of  such  lotions  by  causing  reaction  often  does  more  harm  than  good. 

Gallic  Acid — Astringent  and  Stypic. — Given  in  diabetes  and  for  in- 
ternal hemorrhage.  Dose,  three  to  eight  grains.  The  following  powders 
are  a  useful  form  in  which  to  administer  it. 

Styptic  Powders. — Take  gallic  acid  3  grains,  powdered  alum  4  grains, 
powdered  opium  %  grain,  to  make  one  powder.  One  to  be  given  twice  or 
thrice"  a  day. 

Aconite — The  common  name  of  this  plant  is  monk's-hood,  and  both 
the  leaves  and  root  are  used  in  medicine.  The  liniment  of  aconite  of  the 
British  Pharmacopoeia  often  proves  of  great  value  in  assuaging  the  pangs 
of  rheumatism,  and  the  tincture  added  to  the  distemper  mixture  is,  in  cases 
where  there  is  nervous  excitement,  of  great  value.  It  must  always  be 
given  with  great  caution.  The  dose  of  the  tincture  is  from  one-half  to  three 
drops,  according  to  age  and  size. 

j        Aio©e.»-Thi8  is  one  of  the  safest  and  best  purgatives  for  the  dog,  the 


284  DRUGS. 

dose  is  from  ten  grains  up  to  twenty  grains,  the  dog  requiring  a  propor- 
tionately much  larger  dose  of  this  drug  than  man;  it  is,  however,  always 
advisable  to  try  the  effects  of  the  smaller  dose  first,  as  the  lives  of  many 
dogs  are  sacrificed  to  a  rash  boldness  in  administering  overdoses.  Aloes 
are  generally  given  in  conjunction  with  other  purgatives,  as  jalap,  rhubarb, 
etc.,  and  they  enter  into  the  composition  of  most  aperient  pills  made  for 
the  dog.     The  following  is  a  useful  mild  aperient  bolus: 

Mild  Aperient  Bolus. — Take  aloes  socotrine,  iy2  drams;  powdered  jalap, 
2  scruples;  powdered  ginger,  1  scruple;  Castile  soap,  y%  dram;  make  into 
twelve  balls.     Dose,  one  or  two.     Or  for  small  dogs,  into  24  pills. 

Alum. — Astringent;  dose  four  to  eight  grains,  given  in  diabetes  and 
internal  hemmorrhage  (see  Acid,  gallic).  Alum  is  also  given  in  cases  of 
obstinate  diarrhea,  in  conjunction  with  opium,  and  it  may  be  advanta- 
geously given  in  such  cases  as  a  clyster,  dissolved  in  gruel.  Burnt  alum  is  a 
very  mild  caustic  applied  to  fungus  growths. 

Ammonia,  Aromatic  Spirits  of  (Spirit  of  Sal  Volatile). — A  diffusible 
stimulant  and  antacid.  It  is  useful  in  colic,  and  is  given  in  cases  of  de- 
pression of  the  vital  powers.  The  dose  is  from  ten  drops  to  a  teaspoonful. 
It  must  always  be  largely  diluted  before  it  is  given. 

Ammonia,  Muriate. — Sal  ammoniac.     For  uses  see  Acetic  acid. 

Ammonia,  Solution  gf  Acetate  of  (Mindererus'  Spirit). — Given  in  febrile 
and  inflammatory  disorders,  distemper,  pneumonia,  etc.  The  following  mix- 
ture for  distemper  which  may  be  given  in  any  case  where  feverishness  or 
inflammation  is  present: 

Distemper  Mixture. — Take  chlorate  of  potash  2  drams,  sweet  spirit  of 
nitre  2  drams,  Mindererus'  spirit  1  ounce,  tincture  of  henbane  2  drams,  wa- 
ter sufficient  to  make  4  ounces.  Dose,  from  one-half  to  three  teaspoonfuls 
three  or  four  times  a  day. 

Ammonia,  Strong  Liquid. — This  is  used  as  a  blister  to  the  dog  (see 
Blisters).  Diluted  with  three  parts  of  distilled  water,  it  forms  the  spirit 
of  hartshorn  of  the  shops,  which,  with  other  articles,  is  used  as  a  liniment 
for  sprains,  bruises,  rheumatism,  etc. 

Liniment  for  Sprains. — Equal  parts  of  spirit  of  hartshorn,  turpentine, 
rape  oil,  and  laudanum,  make  a  generally  useful  liniment  for  the  above 
purposes.     If  in  a  glass-stoppered  bottle  it  will  not  be  impaired  by  keeping. 

Antimonial  Powder  (True  James'  Powder). — This  is  given  as  a  febri- 
fuge and  diaphoretic  in  doses  of  from  four  to  six  grains;  it  is  preferred  to 
tartar  emetic,  as  not  being  so  likely  to  excite  the  dog's  stomach.  It  is  by 
some  relied  on  as  a  cure  for  distemper. 

Antimony,  Tartarated  (Tartar  Emetic). — This,  as  its  name  implies,  is 
an  emetic.  On  the  dog's  stomach  it  acts  very  quickly;  but,  indeed,  vomiting 
appears  to  be  quite  a  natural  act  in  the  dog,  and  no  doubt  it  is  attended 
with  beneficial  results  when  he  is  his  own  doctor  and  applies  to  his  natural 
physic,  the  couch  or  dog  grass;  but  this  habit  in  the  dog  has  been  used  to 
his  injury,  and  the  use  of  emetics  shamefully  abused,  and  from  being  treat- 
ed as  a  panacea  for  all  dog  ills,  has  done  much  harm.  Emetics  are,  however, 
of  use,  and  it  is  not  bad  practice  to  give  one  on  the  first  appearance  of  dis- 
temper or  jaundice,  and  in  cases  of  poisoning  they  are  our  sheet  anchor. 
The  dose  of  tartar  emetic,  as  an  emetic,  is  from  one  to  three  grains  given 
dissolved  in  warm  water,  and  the  dog  freely  drenched  with  it.  It  is  also  used 
as  a  febrifuge  in  doses  of  one-eighth  of  a  grain  to  half  a  grain;  but  for 


DRUGS.  285 

this  purpose  the  James's  Powder,  another  preparation  of  antimony,  is  to  be 
preferred. 

Arnica,  Tincture  of. — This  is  applied  externally  as  a  stimulant  in 
sprains,  bruises  and  rheumatic  lameness  ,and  also  for  dispersing  tumors.  It 
should  be  used  as  a  lotion  diluted  with  from  ten  to  twenty  parts  of  cold 
water. 

Arsenic,  Fowler's  Solution  of. — This  is,  I  believe,  the  only  way  in 
which  arsenic  is  given  to  the  dog.  It  is  an  alterative,  and,  as  such,  is  of 
great  value  in  some  cases  of  mange  and  other  obstinate  skin  diseases.  The 
dose  is  from  two  to  eight  drops.  It  should  always  be  given  on  a  full  stom- 
ach, and  it  must  be  withheld  for  a  week  or  so  if  it  has  produced  redness  of 
the  eyes,  running  of  watery  fluid  from  the  nose,  and  a  loathing  of  food. 
I  generally  give  it  with  a  tonic  to  prevent  this  last  result.  Give  each  dose 
in  a  teaspoonful  of  tincture  of  gentian  or  Peruvian  bark,  immediately  after 
a  meal. 

Belladonna Deadly   nightshade.      This   is   a   narcotic   and   sedative   of 

very  powerful  action,  and,  like  aconite,  must  be  used  with  great  caution.  The 
tincture  is  the  most  useful  preparation  of  it.     Dose,  from  two  to  six  drops. 

Bonzoin,  Tincture  of  (Friar's  Balsam). — An  excellent  application  to 
cuts,  tears,  bites,  &c.  It  should  be  applied  as  soon  as  the  parts  are  cleaned 
from  dirt,  &c,  to  stop  bleeding  and  protect  the  exposed  surface.  The  tinc- 
ture is  also  given  in  chronic  coughs.     Dose,  ten  or  fifteen  drops  on  sugar. 

Bismuth — The  subnitrate  of  bismuth  has  a  soothing  effect  in. stomach 
disorders,  and  in  long-continued  diarrhea  is  often  most  beneficial.  Three 
to  ten  grains  of  it  may  in  such  cases  be  given  twice  a  day  in  chalk  mixture. 

Bromide  of  Potassium — This  is  very  useful  in  epileptic  fits  and  to  allay 
excitement.  It  may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  five  to  twenty  grains,  and 
where  a  dog  is  subject  to  fits,  continued  for  two  or  three  weeks.  It  has, 
however,   a   debilitating   effect. 

Buckthorn  (Syrup  of). — This  is  a  time-honored  purgative  for  the  dog, 
and  a  very  good  one,  although  it  has  got  into  disrepute,  as  I  believe, 
through  the  rubbish  that  is  too  commonly  sold  under  the  name;  or  since  it 
became  obsolete  as  a  medicine  for  man  druggists  have  been  less  careful  in  its 
preparation.  The  syrup  should  be  made  from  the  fresh  juice  of  the  berries 
of  buckthorn  (Rhamous  catharticus),  a  shrub  or  tree  which  grows  plenti- 
fully in  our  woods  and  hedges.  The  average  dose  is  one  tablespoonful,  and 
to  prevent  griping  a  teaspoonful  of  syrup  of  white  poppies  should  be  added. 

Calomel Acts    as    an     emetic  and    purgative;     it   is   at  all   times  an 

uncertain  and  unsafe  medicine  for  the  dog.  Youatt  and  others  say  it  should 
never  be  given  in  larger  doses  than  three  grains.  Country  farriers  and 
others  often  give  it  in  much  larger  doses — indeed,  by  the  rule  of  thumb — ■ 
and  the  consequence  is  the  death  or  utter  ruin  of  many  valuable  dogs.  As 
a  remedy  in  the  yellows  and  other  affections  of  the  liver,  podophyllin,  or 
"vegetable  calomel,"  is  safer  and  more  effective. 

Camphor — Calmative  and  antispasmodic.  May  be  given  in  cases 
of  excitement  and  restlessness,  and  also  in  severe  diarrhea.  The  dose  is 
from  two  to  eight  grains. 

Carren  Oil A  most  useful  application  to  scalds  or  burns.     It  is  made 

by  mixing  equal  parts  of  raw  linseed  oil  and  lime  water. 


286  DRUGS.  "' 

Castor  Oil Purgative.     Dose,  from  a  teaspoonful  to  a  wineglassful. 

It  is  a  mistake  to  give  very  large  doses,  as  such  are  useless,  the  excess  being 
carried  off  by  the  bowels. 

Cayenne  Pepper — Stimulant  and  stomachic. 

Chalk,  prepared — Anticid  in  its  effects;  it  is  particularly  useful  in 
diarrhea,  for  which  it  may  be  given  alone  if  nothing  better  can  be  conven- 
iently had.     Dose,  as  much  as  will  lie  on  a  quarter. 

Chloral  Hydrate — Antispasmodic  and  soporific.  May  be  given  in  cases 
of  fits,  also  when  the  dog  suffers  great  pain.  Dose,  from  five  to  twenty 
grains,  according  to  size  of  dog,  and  the  result  it  is  desired  to  produce.  The 
larger  dose  would  induce  sleep. 

Chloroform. — Principally  used  as  an  anoesthetic  in  painful  operations. 
It  also  acts  as  an  anodyne  and  antispasmodic  in  colic,  etc.  As  such  it  is 
generally  given  in  the  form  of  chloric  ether,  the  dose  of  which  is  from  ten 
to  thirty  drops  in  water  or  other  fluid. 

Uhinchoiia,  or  Peruvian  Bark. — This  is  a  well  known  medicine,  and, 
as  a  tonic,  suits  the  dog  admirably.  It  is  especially  useful  after  distemper 
and  other  lowering  diseases,  and  works  wonders  in  getting  dogs  into  high- 
class  condition  for  shows  or  work.  The  following  preparation  of  the  bark 
is  most  convenient,  being  in  concentrated  form,  and  will  keep  good  for 
years: 

Concentrated  Bark  Tonic. — Take  concentrated  decoction  of  yellow  cin- 
chona bark,  compound  tincture  of  bark,  equal  parts;  dose,  one  to  two  tea- 
sponfuls  twice  daily  in  water,  as  a  drench. 

Cod  .Liver  Oil. — This  well  known  medicine  is  given  to  the  dog  in 
cases  of  debility  and  emaciation  supervening  inflammatory  attacks,  and  to 
arrest  the  progress  of  chronic  diseases  of  the  respiratory  organs.  It  is  also 
given  in  scrofulous  affections.  Excellent  for  ricketty  and  weakly  dogs; 
but  it  is  injurious  to  give  it  to  strong  growing  pups  of  the  larger  breeds,  as 
it  makes  fat,  and  the  pups  get  so  heavy  the  legs  often  give  way.  Dose, 
from  a  teaspoonful  to  a  tablespoonful.     Large  doses  are  a  mistake. 

Copper,  Sulphate  of  (Blue  Stone). — Externally  applied,  it  is  a  mild 
caustic;  internally  administered,  astringent  and  tonic;  dose  from  %  to  2 
grains,  but  is  apt  to  cause  vomiting.  In  applying  it  to  proud  flesh  in  sores, 
choose  a  crystal  with  a  smooth  surface,  which  wet  and  rub  on  the  part,  or 
scrape  a  little  into  fine  powder  and  dust  over  the  sore. 

Cream  of  Tartar — A  cooling  laxative  and  diuretic.  Dose,  ten  to 
twenty  grains,  given  daily. 

Dandelion. — Given  in  jaundice,  and  other  liver  affections.  The  extract 
is  the  most  convenient  form,  or  the  decoction  made  as  follows  may  be 
given:  Fresh  dandelion  roots,  sliced,  6  ounces;  water,  iy2  pints;  boil 
slowly  down  to  half  a  pint.     Dose,  half  a  wineglass. 

Digitalis — See  Foxglove. 

Idpsom  Salts — Purgative.  Dose,  one  to  three  drams.  A  convenient 
form  for  giving  this  salts  is  the  ordinary  black  draught  of  the  shops. 


DRUGS.  "  287 

Ergot  of  Kye Useful  in  cases  of  protracted  parturition.  Five  to  fif- 
teen grains  may  be  given  in  a  little  warm  water  with  a  teaspoonful  of  brandy 
added.     The  dose  repeated  in  an  hour  if  needed. 

Ether,  Spirit  of  Nitrous  (Sweet  Spirit  of  Nitre). — Diaphoretic  and 
diuretic.     It  is  given  in  distemper,  fevers,  influenza,  etc. 

COMFORTABLE  WINTER  QUARTERS. 


Dogs  that  are  not  allowed  to  sleep  in  your  house,  must  have  a  com- 
fortable house  or  kennel  provided  for  them,  where  they  can  sleep  warm 
enough  in  it  at  night,  or,  in  very  cold  weather,  to  go  into  during  the  day. 
At  my  kennels,  I  have  twenty-four  individual  yards,  (aside  from  three  large 
exercising  yards),  and  in  each  individual  yard  a  small  kennel  prepared 
as  follows:  I  buy  an  empty  upright  piano  box,  set  it  on  a  foundation  ten 
inches  from  the  ground,  put  a  second  floor  in,  between  which  is  tar  paper; 
put  a  door  in  front,  three  feet  high,  two  wide,  to  only  close  part  way,  so 
dog  can  get  in.  Then  I  make  a  slanting  roof  and  cover  this  and  front  of 
box  with  tin,  or  some  composition  roofing,  the  sides  and  back  being  bat- 
tened where  the  boards  join  together,  so  no  cold  air  gets  in.  Now,  be- 
fore hanging  the  door,  build  inside  an  inner  sleeping  compartment  on  one 
side,  boarded  on  top  and  half  of  the  front,  a  board  six  inches  high  across 
bottom  to  keep  the  straw  in,  and  for  winter  use  tack  some  carpet  over 
the  front  of  this  sleeping  box  you  have  made,  and  also  several  thicknesses 
of  covering  the  opening  made  for  the  door,  fastened  only  at  the  top,  the 
dog  will  push  through  this  covering  and  into  his  bedroom,  and  with  plenty 
of  straw  for  bedding,  will  sleep  warm  and  comfortable.  If  you  have  two 
dogs  that  are  congenial,  it  is  all  the  better  that  they  sleep  together.  Small 
dogs  with  short  coats  and  toy  dogs,  are  kept  in  an  L  of  my  house,  with  a 
stove  that  never  goes  out  'till  spring  comes,  for  such  dogs  require  a  heated 
place  in  cold  weather.  Dogs  such  as  collies,  setters,  pointers,  and  large 
dogs  can  stand  it  all  right  outdoors,  if  the  place  is  provided  as  I  have  de- 
scribed. The  carpet  on  the  front  of  the  inner  room  should  have  a  part  or 
corner  of  it  cut  off,  or  fastened  back,  making  a  small  opening  for  air. 
Have  your  kennel  facing  south  so  as  to  get  the  great  benefit  of  the  sun. 

For  kennel  locations  choose  ground  that  lies  high  and  dries  quickly. 
Heavy  soil  on  which  water  rests  instead  of  draining  away  freely  is  condu- 
cive to  all  sorts  of  troubles.  However  expensive  a  kennel,  it  can  never 
be  suitable  for  dogs  unless  perfectly  dry,  for  dampness  causes  much  sick- 
ness. If  there  is  one  thing  more  than  another  a  dog  cannot  stand,  it  is 
dampness.  He  requires  plenty  of  water  to  drink,  but  none  in  his  bed.  It 
is  the  underpart  of  his  body  that  has  the  least  protection. 


288  MEDICAL  TERMS. 

MEDICAL    TERMS. 


(This  classification  of  drugs  and  explanations  is  given  because  the 
terms  are  used  to  avoid  verbosity). 

Alteratives. — Medicines  which,  if  given  in  small  and  repeated  doses 
gradually  bring  about  a  healthy  state  of  the  system  without  seriously  aug- 
menting the  secretions — such  as  arsenic  and  its  preparations,  iodide  of  po- 
tassium, etc. 

Anesthetics. — Chloroform,  or  ether,  drugs  that  deprive  of  sensation  or 
feeling.  t  ..^^ 

Anodynes. — Morphine   or   cocaine,   drugs   that   assuage  pain. 

Antiseptics. — Medicines  that  resist  or  check  putrefaction,  such  as  chlor- 
ide of  lime,  carbolic  acid,  soda,  creosote,  etc. 

Antispasmodics. — Medicine  that  overcomes  inordinate  muscular  action, 
from  their  sedative  effects  allaying  spasms  and  convulsions,  as  chloroform 
or  opium. 

Aperients. — See  Cathartics. 

Astringents. — Drugs   used   internally  that  contract  muscular   fiber  and 

check  diarrhea,  hemorrhage  and  diabetes,  used  extensively  to  stop 
bleeding  and  diminish  discharge  from  wounds,  such  as  alum,  gallic  acid,  etc. 

Blisters. — Agents  used  as  counter  irritants  for  internal  inflammation. 
Strong  liquid  ammonia  being  a  good  and  quick  blister  for  a  dog;  it  may  be 
applied  on  a  cloth  or  sponge  held  on  the  part  to  be  blistered  for  about  ten 
minutes.  Spirits  of  turpentine  is  also  good;  wring  a  piece  of  red  flannel 
out  of  hot  water,  sprinkle  with  turpentine,  and  apply  to  the  part.  Pure 
olive  oil  should  afterward  be  applied  to  blistered  parts. 

Cordials. — Medicines  that  increase  strength,  stimulate  the  stomach 
and  animate  the  spirits.  Cordials  are  often  given  to  hunting  dogs  after 
a  hard  day's  work  in  the  field.     Here  is  a  good  one  to  use. 

Cordiane  Ball. — Take  powdered  cardamon  seeds  1  dram,  oil  of  carra- 
ways  10  drops,  oil  of  cloves  5  drops,  powdered  gum  acacia  %  dram,  made 
into  a  paste  with  syrup;  dose  for  a  greyhound  or  hunting  dogs  is  one- 
fourth  of  this,  given  wrapped  in  an  ounce  of  lean  mutton. 

Carminatives. — Medicines  that  expel  wind,  such  as  oil  of  peppermint, 
ginger,   etc. 

Cathartics,  Purgatives,  Aperients. — Medicines  to  cause  discharges, 
cleansing  stomach   and  bowels.      Laxatives  and  mild  aperients. 

Caustics. — Agents  that  destroy  or  decompose  parts  to  which  they  are 
applied,  used  for  proud  flesh  in  wounds,  to  destroy  warts,  to  sear  the  parts 
and  prevent  absorption  of  virus  in  case  of  bites,  etc.,  etc.  Nitrate  of  silver, 
carbolic  acid,  nitric  acid  or  the  hot  iron  are  the  most  active. 

Demulcents. — Agents  to  soften  effecs  of  irritants,  by  sheathing  the 
surface,  such  as  glycerine,  gum  acacia,  and  are  used  as  a  vehicle  in  giving 
such  irritating  articles  as  turpentine,  oil  of  male  fern,  and  many  others. 

Diaphoretics. — Medicines  to  produce  sweating,  as  sweet  spirits  of  nitre. 

Diuxetics, — Remedies  which  increase  discharge  of  urine,  such  as  nitrate 
of  potash,  Venice  turpentine,  balsam  copabia,  etc. 


MEDICAL  TERMS.  289 

Emetics. — Agents  used  to  produce  vomiting.  A  dog's  stomach  is  very 
easily  acted  on.  Numerous  medicines  are  used.  Ipecacuanha  wine  is  easy 
in  its  effects.  Emetic  tartar  and  common  salt  are  useful  emetics.  .  Dogs 
eat   grass   to   produce   vomiting. 

Emollients. — Agents  that  soften  or  relax  the  parts  applied  to,  such  as 
poultices,  camphorated  oil,  olive  oil  and  fomentations. 

Laxatives. — See  Cathartics. 

Narcotics. — Medicines  to  produce  sleep  and  relieve  pain.  Morphine  is 
used  mostly  for  the  dog. 

Purgatives. — See  Cathartics. 

Stimulants. — Medicine  and  liquors  used  to  produce  immediate  but  tem- 
porary increase  of  strength;  given  in  collapse,  exhaustion,  or  in  excessive 
debility,  when  fever  is  not  present.  Sherry  wine  clear,  whisky  with  a  little 
water  added,   or   good  port  wine,   are   good. 

Stomachics  and  Tonics. — Medicines  to  excite  and  strengthen  the  stom- 
ach. Tonics  are  especially  good  in  cases  of  debility  following  fever,  dis- 
temper and  lowering  diseases;  mostly  used  for  the  dog  are,  quinine,  iron, 
gentian,  rhubarb  ,etc.  There  are  several  condition  pills  now  put  up,  espe- 
cially for  dogs.  Sergeants'  Condition  Pills,  Glover's  Tonic  and  Dent's 
Condition  Pills  are  all  good.  Dr.  Glover's  is  in  liquid  form.  Either  of 
these  will  do  the  work. 

Vermifuge. — Medicines  to   destroy   or   expel   worms. 

Clysters  or  Enemas. — These  agents  are  mostly  in  the  liquid  form,  and 
are  administered  for  various  purposes,  as  the  softening  and  removal  of 
hardened  fceces,  the  allaying  of  spasm  or  colic  in  the  bowels,  the  destruction 
of  worms,  for  checking  diarrhea,  and  more  rarely  for  nourishing  the  body. 
The  forms  for  clysters  will  be  found  in  the  parts  of  the  work  treating  of 
these  ailments  in  which  they  are  used.  The  means  of  injecting  the  clyster 
is  usually  the  common  bladder  and  pipe  sold  by  druggists  at  2  5  cents 
each,  or  what  is  greatly  better,  an  india  rubber  bottle  enema,  which  gives 
the  operator  greater  power,  and  is  itself  less  trouble,  being  self-filling. 


290  TERMS  RELATING  TO  DOGS. 

DEFINITION  OP  TERMS  RELATING  TO  DOGS. 


Apple  Headed. — Skull  round,  instead  of  flat,  on  top. 

Babbler. — A  dog  that  gives  too  much  tongue  when  working. 

Beefy. — Big,  beefy  hindquarters. 

Belton. —  (Blue  and  lemon)  spotted  or  flecked,  and  applied  to  Laverick 
Setters. 

Blaze. — A  white  mark  or  stripe  up  the  face. 

Blood. — A  dog  which  shows  high  breeding. 

Breeching. — The  tan-colored  hairs  on  the  back  of  the  thighs  of  a 
Black-and-tan  Terrier. 

Broken-up  Face. — Refers  more  particularly  to  the  face  of  the  Bulldog 
or  Toy  Spaniel,  and  comprises  the  receding  nose,  or  lay-back,  deep  stop,  and 
wrinkle. 

Burr. — The  inside  of  the  ears. 

Brisket. — That  part  of  the  body  in  front  of  the  cnest,  or  the  chest. 

Brush. — The  long  fringe  of  hair  on  under  side  of  tail  of  long-haired 
dogs. 

Butterfly  Nose. — A  nose  with  spotted  nostrils. 

Button-Ear. — An  ear  which  falls  over  in  front,  concealing  the  mside, 
as   in  Fox  Terrier. 

Cat-footed. — A  short,  round  foot,  with  knuckles  high  and  well  devel- 
oped.    A  desirable  foot  for  all  running  dogs. 

Chaps  or  Chops. — The  pendulous  lips  of  the  bulldog;  the  foreface  of 
a  bulldog. 

Character. — Pronounced  indications  of  the  breed  to  which  the  dog  be- 
longs; also,  marked  indications  of  intelligence. 

Cheeky. — When  the  cheek  bumps  are  strongly  defined;  thick  in  cheek. 

Chest. — The  chest  of  a  dog  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  brisket; 
the  breast  or  chest  extends  between  the  fore-legs  from  the  brisket  to  the 
belly. 

Cloddy  or  Cobby. — Thick-set,  short-coupled,  and  low  in  stature. 

Cobby. — Well  ribbed  up,   short  and  compact  in  build. 

Comb-fringe. — The  long  hair  that  hangs  down  from  the  tail  of  the 
setter. 

Condition. — In  good  health,  flesh  and  coat. 

Couplings. — The  length  of  space  between  the  tops  or  tne  shoulder 
blades  and  the  tops  of  the  hip  joints.  The  term  denotes  the  proportionate 
length  of  the  dog,  such  as  long  and  short  in  the  couplings. 

Cow-Hocked. — The    hocks    turning    inwards. 

Crank-tail — Same  as  above. 

Crest. — The  upper  ridge  or  portion  of  the  dog's  neck.  Generally  ap- 
plied to  sporting  dogs. 


TERMS  RELATING  TO  DOGS.  291 

Crook-tail. — The  crooked  tail  of  a  Bulldog. 

Cushion. — Fullness  in  the  top  lips. 

Deep  in  Brisket. — Deep  in  chest;  deep  from  withers  to  point  where 
chest  and  brisket  meet. 

Dew-Claws. — Extra  claws,  found  on  the  inside  of  the  lower  portion  of 
the  hind-legs  of  many  dogs. 

Dewlap. — Pendulous  skin  under  the  throat. 

Dish-Faced. — Having  the  nose  higher  at  the  tip  than  at  the  stop.  Some- 
times seen  in  Pointers. 

Dome. — High  in  skull,  showing  an  elevation  between  the  ears. 

Dudley  Nose. — A  flesh-colored  nose. 

Elbow. — The  joint  at  the  top  of  the  forearm. 

Elbows  Out. — Where  the  elbow  joints  turn  perceptibly  out  from  the 
body,  as  in  Bulldogs  or  Dachshunds. 

Expression. — The  expression  of  a  dog  is  largely  but  not  wholly  deter- 
mined by  the  size,  angular  position,  and  degree  of  prominence  of  the  eye. 
For  instance,  in  a  St.  Bernard  the  eye  is  small,  somewhat  sunken,  showing 
a  little  haw.  This  gives  a  dignified  and  rather  benevolent  expression. 
"Collie  expression"  depends  largely  on  the  angle  at  which  eyes  are  set 
to  each  other. 

Faking. — Disguising  a  dog's  coat  or  appearance  by  dyeing,  staining, 
clipping,  or  otherwise  interfering  with  the  dog's  natural  formation. 

Feather. — The  fringe  or  hair  on  the  back  of  the  legs  of  some  breeds, 
notably  Setters,   Spaniels  and   Collies. 

Fiddle-Headed. — A  long,  gaunt,  wolfish  head,  as  seen  in  some  Mastiffs. 

Flag. — The  tail,  with  its  long  hair,  as  seen  in  some  Setters  and  New- 
foundlands. 

Flat-Sided. — Flat  in  ribs;   opposite  of  well-ribbed  up. 

Flews. — The  overhanging  lips  of  the  upper  jaw.  The  term  chiefly  ap- 
plied to  hounds  or  other  deep  mouthed  dogs. 

Forearm. — The  principal  part  of  the  fore-leg,  extending  from  elbow 
to  pastern. 

Frill. — The  fringe  or  hair  on  the  chest  of  dogs,  especially  as  in  the 
Collie. 

Frog-Face  or  Down-Face. — Nose  not  receding. 

Grizzle. — A  bluish-gray  color. 

Hare-foot. — A  long,  narrow  foot,  carried  forward.  The  opposite  of 
Cat-foot. 

Harlequin. — Pied,  mottled,  or  patchy  in  color. 

Haw. — The  red,  inside  eyelid,  as  shown  in  the  Bloodhound  and  St. 
Bernard. 

Height. — The  height  of  a  dog  is  measured  at  the  shoulder.  The  proper 
method  is  to  stand  the  dog  on  level  ground,  close  by  a  wall,  and  to  lay  a 
flat  rule  across  his  shoulders  horizontally  so  as  to  touch  the  wall;  then 
measure  to  the  point  touched  by  the  rule.     Some  people  "tape"  from  the 


292  TERMS  RELATING  TO  DOGS. 

center  between  the  shoulders  to  the  ground,  but  this  plan  obviously  adds 
to  the  real  height  of  the  dog,  and  is  practically  a  fraud. 

Hocks. — The  hock-joints. 

Huckle-bones. — Tops  of  the  hip-joints.     The  space  between  these  and 
the  tops  of  the  shoulders  is  called  the  couplings. 

Kink-Tail. — A  tail  with  a  single  break  or  kink  in  it. 

Knee. — The  joint  attaching  the  fore-pastern  and  forearm. 

Leather. — The   skin.      Especially  applied   to   the  ear. 

Leggy. — Too  long  in  leg  compared  with  tlie  body.     Stilted. 

Lengthy. — Denoting  length  of  body,  as  in  the  Skye  or  St.  Bernard. 

Level. — Applied  to  jaws  and  teeth  where  they  meet  in  front,  and  means 
that  they  meet  evenly. 

Loins. — That  part  of  the  anatomy  of  the  dog  between  the  last  rib  and 
hindquarters. 

Long  in  Flank. — Long  in  back  and  loins. 

Lippy. — Overhanging  lips,  where  such  ought  not  to  exist. 

Lumber. — Superfluous  flesh. 

Mane. — The   feather,   or  long   fine   hair   on   shoulders   of   Collies,   New- 
foundlands and  some  other  breeds. 

Mane. — The  profuse  hair  on  top  of  neck. 

Mask. — The  dark  muzzle  of  a  Mastiff  or   Pug. 

Merle. — A  bluish-gray  color  splashed  with  black. 

Monkey-faced. — See*  Dish-faced. 

Occiput. — The  prominent  bone  at  the  back  or  top  of  the  skull.     Particu- 
larly  prominent   in   Bloodhounds. 

Out  at  Shoulders. — Shoulders  set  on  outside,  as  in  the  Bulldog, 

Out  at  Elbows. — Elbows  turning  out. 

Overshot. — The  upper  teeth  projecting  beyond  the  lower.     This  fault  in 
excess  makes  a  dog  pig-jawed. 

Pad. — The  under  portion  or  sole  of  the  foot. 

Pastern. — The  lowest  section  of  the  leg  below  the  knee  or  hock  junc- 
tion with   foot. 

Peaked. — Dome  of  skull  high,  as  in  Bloodhounds  and  Irish  Setters. 

Penciling. — The   black   marks   or   streaks   divided   by   tan   on   the   toes 
of  a  Black-and-tan  Terrier. 

Pig-Jawed. — The  upper  jaw  longer  than  the  lower. 

Piley. — A   mixture   of  hard   and   soft  hair   in   the   coat,   the   short  coat 
being   woolly. 

Plume. — The  tail  of  a  Pomeranian. 

Prick  Ear. —  (See  Tulip-ear.)     An  erect  ear;  not  turned  down  or  folded. 


TERMS  RELATING  TO  DOGS.  293 

Quality. — The  evidence  of  good  blood  and  breeding,  and  of  desirable 
characteristics  as  shown  in  the  general  appearance  of  the  dog. 

Racy. — Slight  in  build  and  leggy,  as  in  the  Greyhound  or  Whippet. 

Ring-Tailed. — Where  the  tail  at  the  end  curls  into  a  ring. 

Roach  Back  or  Arched  Loins. — The  arched  or  wheel  formation  of  loin, 
as  in  a   Greyhound,   Dachshund,   Dandie  Dinmont  Terrier,  and   Bulldog. 

Rose-Ear.— An  ear  of  which  the  tip  turns  backward  and  downward; 
that  is,  it  folds  at  the  back,  and  the  tip  laps  over  outward,  showing  part  of 
the  inside  of  the  ear. 

Second  Thighs. — The  muscular  development  between  stifle-joint  and 
hock. 

Semi-Prick  Ear. — An   erect   ear   of  which   the  end   falls   over   forward. 

Septum. — The  division  between   the  nostrils. 

Shelly. — Too  narrow  and  light  in  body. 

Short-Coupled. — Short  in  back  and  loins. 

Shoulder. — The  top  of  the  shoulder  blade,  the  point  at  which  the 
height   of  a   dog  is   measured. 

Sickle-Tail. — A   tail   forming   a   semi-circle,   like   a   sickle. 

Skull. — Formed  by  the  frontal,  parietal  and  occipital  bones — the  brain 
box. 

Snipey. — Where  the  muzzle  is  long,  narrow  or  peaked. 

Snipy. — Too  pointed  in  muzzle. 

Splay-Foot. — The  foot  spread  out  flat. 

Stern. — The  region  of  the  tail. 

Stifle. — The   point  next  the  buttock — the  hip   joint. 

Stop.^The  hollow  or  indentation  between  the  skull  and  nasal  bone, 
below  the  <£yes.     This  feature  is  strongly  developed  in  Bulldogs. 

Style. — Showy,  spirited,  or  gay  demeanor. 

Throatiness. — Excess  of  loose  skin  at  the  throat,  dewlap.  In  some 
breeds  this  is  a  fault. 

Thumb  Marks. — The  round,  black  spots  on  the  fore-legs  of  a  Black- 
and-tan   Terrier. 

Tight-Lipped. — Having  no  flew. 

Timber. — Bone. 

Tongue. — -The  voice. 

Top-Knot. — The  hair  on  the  top  of  the  head,  as  in  the  Irish  Water 
Spaniel,   Dandie  Dinmont,  and   Bedlington  Terrier. 

Trace. — The  dark  mark  down  the  back  of  a  Pug. 

Tricolor. — Black,    tan    and    white. 

Tucked-up. — Tucked-up  loin,  as  in  the  Greyhound. 

T^lip   Ea^.-— Partly  pricked,   or    fipright,    and   drooping   at  the   tip. 


294  TERMS  RELATING  TO  DOGS. 

,         Twist. — The  curled  tail  of  a  Pug. 

Undershot. — The  lower  jaw  projecting  beyond  the  upper  one. 

Undershot. — The  lower  incisor  teeth  projecting  beyond  the  upper,  as 
in  Bulldogs.     The  under  jaw  protruding  beyond  the  upper  jaw. 

Upright  Shoulders. — Shoulders  that  are  set  in  an   upright,   instead   of 
an  oblique  position;  not  laid  back. 

"Varmint  Expression. — As  in  the  eye  of  the  Fox  Terrier,  which  is  free 

from  Haw,  is  not  sunken,  is  round  but  rather  small  than  large,  and  set 
horizontally,  not  obliquely,  giving  a  keen,  rather  "cussed"  look. 

Vent. — The  tan-colored  hair  below  root  of  tail. 

Wall-Eye. — A   blue   mottled   eye. 

Weedy. — A  dog  that  is  leggy,  thin,  and  out  of  condition. 

Wheaten. — Pale  yellowish  color.  s 

-* 

Wrinkle. — Loose-folding  skin  over  the  skull. 


HOUNDS  and  HUNTING 

To  Owners  and  Breeders  of  Hounds 
and  Lovers  of  the  Chase 

Here  we  are.  An  old  magazine  with  a  new  name,  under  new  and 
live  management,  published  in  the  interests  of  Hounds,  Hound  owners, 
breeders  and  lovers. 

A  department  devoted  to  "Fox  Hounds  and  Fox  Hunting,"  "Coon 
Hounds  and  Coon  Hunting,"  and  last,  but  by  no  means  least,  for  "Bea- 
gle Hounds  and  Hare  Hunting." 

The  only  publication  in  America  of  any  moment  that  devotes  space 
in  every  issue  to  the  "Little  Hounds"  and  appeals  to  all  breeders  and 
lovers  for  news  and  information  of  interest  to  the  breed. 

Subscription  $1.00  per  year. 

Address 

Hounds  and  Hunting,        Decatur,  III. 


A  PLEA  FOR  THE  DOG.  295 

SENATOR  VEST'S  FAMOUS  PLEA  OX  BEHALF  OF  THE  DOG. 


One  of  the  most  beautiful  tributes  ever  paid  to  the  dog  came  from 
the  lips  of  George  Graham  Vest,  the  distinguished  Missourian,  who  has  re- 
cently retired  to  private  life,  after  a  long  and  honorable  career  in  the 
United  States  Senate.  Senator  Vest  has  long  been  recognized  as  a  most 
forceful  and  eloquent  orator,  and  his  speeches  have  been  widely  read  for 
many  years.  It  is  doubtful,  however,  if  in  all  his  distinguished  career  he 
has  ever  made  a  speech  which  has  been  more  widely  quoted  or  universally 
appreciated  than  his  impromptu  remarks  on  the  dog,  made  many  years  ago 
in  a  country  town. 

Shortly  after  the  Civil  War,  when  he  was  a  young  man,  just  beginning 
the  practice  of  law,  and  without  the  fame  which  has  since  become  his,  he 
happened  to  be  in  attendance  upon  a  term  of  the  Johnson  County  Circuit 
Court,  at  Warrensburg,  Missouri.  A  suit  for  damages  for  the  killing  of  a 
dog  was  on  the  docket,  and  was  in  due  time  called.  Voluminous  evidence 
was  introduced  to  show  that  the  defendant  had  shot  the  dog  in  malice, 
while  other  evidence  tended  to  show  the  dog  had  attacked  the  man.  There 
were  attorneys  engaged  in  this  case,  who,  if  not  then,  have  since  become 
famous.  Senator  Vest  was  not  employed  in  the  case,  but  was  invited  to 
speak  for  the  plaintiff.  The  occasion  is  said  to  have  been  a  rare  one,  and 
his  speech  has  been  highly  praised,  and  has  gone  the  rounds  of  the  press 
for  thirty  years. 

"Gentlemen  of  the  Jury — The  best  friend  a  man  has  in  the  world  may 
turn  against  him,  and  become  his  enemy.  His  son  or  daughter  that  he 
has  reared  with  loving  care  may  prove  ungrateful.  Those  who  are  nearest 
and  dearest  to  us,  those  whom  we  trust  with  our  happiness  and  our  good 
name,  may  become  traitors  to  their  faith.  The  money  that  a  man  has  he 
may  lose.  It  flies  away  from  him,  perhaps  when  he  needs  it  most.  A  man's 
reputation  may  be  sacrificed  in  a  moment  of  ill-considered  action.  The 
people  who  are  prone  to  fall  on  their  knees  to  do  us  honor  when  success 
is  with  us,  may  be  the  first  to  throw  the  stone  of  malice  when  failure 
settles   its  cloud   upon   our   heads. 

"The  one  absolutely  unselfish  friend  that  man  can  have  in  this  selfish 
world,  the  one  that  never  deserts  him,  the  one  that  never  proves  ungrate- 
ful or  treacherous,  is  his  dog.  A  man's  dog  stands  by  him  in  prosperity 
and  in  poverty,  in  health  and  in  sickness.  He  will  sleep  on  the  cold  ground, 
where  the  wintry  winds  blow  and  the  snow  drives  fiercely,  if  only  he  may 
be  near  his  master's  side.  He  will  kiss  the  hand  that  has  no  food  to  offer; 
he  will  lick  the  wounds  and  sores  that  come  in  encounter  with  the  rough- 
ness of  the  world.  He  guards  the  sleep  of  his  pauper  master  as  if  he  were 
a  prince.  When  all  other  friends  desert  he  remains.  When  riches  take 
wings,  and  reputation  falls  to  pieces,  he  is  as  constant  in  his  love  as  the 
sun  in  its  journeys  through  the  heavens. 

"If  fortune  drives  the  master  forth  an  outcast  in  the  world,  friendless 
and  homeless,  the  faithful  dog  asks  no  higher  privilege  than  that  of  accom- 
panying him,  to  guard  him  against  danger,  to  fight  against  his  enemies. 
And  when  the  last  scene  of  all  comes,  and  death  takes  his  master  in  its 
embrace  and  his  body  is  laid  away  in  the  cold  ground,  no  matter  if  all 
other  friends  pursue  their  way,  there  by  the  graveside  will  the  noble  dog 
be  found,  his  head  between  his  paws,  his  eyes  sad,  but  open  in  alert  watch- 
fulness, faithful  and  true  even  in  death." 

The  effect  of  the  speech  is  said  to  have  held  the  court  room  audience 
spellbound,  and  when  Senator  Vest  concluded  his  remarks  there  was  not 
a  dry  eye  in  the  house.  The  case  was  submitted  to  the  jury  without  fur- 
ther argument,  and  in  a  very  few  moments  they  returned  a  verdict  in  favor 
of  the  owner  of  the  dog  for  the  full  amount  sued  for.  The  case  finally 
reached  the  Supreme  Court,  where  it  was  affirmed,  and  is  set  forth  ift  detail 
in  the  50th  Missouri  Reports. 

THE  END. 


DEVOTED  EXCLUSIVELY  TO  THE  DOG  FANCY 
MONTHLY,  $1.00  A  YEAR 

THE  DOG  FANCIER 

Best  Keirnel  Advertising  Medium  in  America. 

Established  in  1891. 

The  oldest,  most  popular  and  most  prosperous  kennel  publication 
in  America.  Advertisers  get  excellent  results  and  the  rates  are  very 
low.     Covers  the  entire  United  States  and  Canada. 

If  he  is  interested  in  dogs,  you  are  pretty  sure  to  reach  him  through 
THE  DOG  FANCIER. 

Write  us  for  sample  copy   (free)   and  for  advertising  rates. 

EUGENE  GLASS,  Publisher, 

Battle  Creek  Michigan 

We  are  publishers  of  "THE  COCKER  SPANIEL,"  the  only  book  on 

the  breed  printed;   price,  paper,  50   cents;    cloth,   $1.00.     Also   "THE 

SPORTING  BULL  TERRIER,"   cloth,    $1.00. 

PEDIGREE  BLANKS — Five  generation,  15  cents  per  dozen,  $1.25 
per  100,  postpaid. 

Send  all  orders  to 

THE    DOG    FANCIER 


EUGENE  GLASS,  PUBLISHER, 


BATTLE  CREEK,  MICHIGAN. 


IF  YOU 

WANT  to 

BUY  a 

OF  ANY  BREED,  and 

will  send  your  order  to 
me,  I  will  furnish  it  from 
any  of  the  first-class  Ken- 
nels whose  advertisement 
you  see  in  this  book. 

AT  THEIR  PRICE 

Dog  will  be  exactly  as 
represented,  and  you  will 
be  satisfied. 

AL.  G.  EBERHART 

CAMP  DENNISON,  OHIO. 


ENGLISH  PUGS 

FAWNS  and  BLACKS 

We  are  the  OLDEST 
Pug  breeders  in  Amer- 
ica, started  in  them  forty 
years  ago,  and  at  the 
present  time,  there  are 
only  two  o:her  Pug 
breeders  in  the  United 
States,  boih  of  them  hav- 
ing either  bought  from 
us,  or  bred  to  our  stud 
dogs.  Pugs  Are  Scarce 
and  in  great  demand. 

We  ran  m  i  n-imily   furnish 
puppies 

Fawns  $25  to  $35 
Blacks*$35  to,  $50 

DOGS  AT  STUD  —  both'colors  —  FEE  $10  and  $15 

A  Wonderfully 

Intelligent 

and  Loving 

Pet  is  a  Pug 

a  Great 
House  Dog 

THE  EBERHART  KENNELS 

CAMP  DENNISON,  OHIO 


Glover's  Imperial  Dog  Remedies 


The  Pioneer  American  Dog  Medicines 

The  Result  of  35  Years  Experience  in  the  Treatment  of  Sick 

Dogs 

COMPLETE  LIST 

Distemper  Remedy    .  .  .$1   00       Condition   Pills    $0    50 


Eye  Lotion 50 

Mange  Remedy    50 

Vermifuge    50 

Canker   Wash    50 

Blood  Purifier    50 

Tonic 50 

Fit  Remedy    50 

Cough    Mixture    50 

Kennel  and  Stable  Soap  25 


Sore  Foot  Remedy.  .  .  . 

Liniment 

Diarrhoea   Remedy    .  .  . 
Tapeworm    Capsules .  .  . 

Worm  Capsules   

Comp.    Sulphur    Pills.. 

Liver  Pills    

Digestive  Pills 

Black  Tongue  Remedy. 


50 
50 
50 
50 
50 
50 
50 
50 
50 


SOLD  BY  DRUGGISTS  AND  SPORTING  GOODS  DEALERS 
Refuse  Worthless  Substitutes 

Book  on  "Dog  Diseases  and  How  to  Feed"  free  on  application 

to 

H.  CLAY  GLOVER.  V.   S. 

(Veterinarian  to  the  Westminster  Kennel  Club  for  25  Years) 
118    WEST    Slst    STREET,  NEW    YORK    CITY 


SERGEANT'S  DOG  REMEDIES 

Originated  by  Polk  Miller,  for 
more  than  50  years  a  lover  of 
dogs  and  a  man  possessed 
with  practical  ideas  about 
treating  dogs.  Sergeant's  Dog 
Remedies  are  recognized  by 
dog  men  and  kennel  owners 
throughout  the  United  States 
as  the  veiyoest  on  uc  market.  Veterinary  surgeons  in  pre- 
scribing them  say — "It  is  no  experiment  to  use  these  goods, 
for  they  have  become  the  standard  in  our  practice." 

Sergeant's  Dog  Remedies  are  sold  by  leading  druggists  and 
pet  shops  throughout  the  United  States,  or  they-  will  be  sent 
to  any  address  upon  receipt  of  price. 

SERGEANTS 

Condition  Pills,   large,   per   box $1.00 

Condition  Pills,   small,   per  box 50 

Sure  Shot  Capsules,  per  box 50 

Arsenic   and   Iron   Pills,   per  box 50 

Sure  Shot  Liquid,   per  bottle    50 

Cough    Remedy 50 

Tapeworm    Remedy     50 

Liquid  Remedy  for  Ordinary  Mange,  per  bottle 50 

Flea  Remedy,  per  bottle 25 

Rheumatic  Pills,  per  box 50 

Carbolic-Tar    Soap,    per    cake 25 

Canker  Wash,  per  bottle    50 

Black  Tongue  Remedy 50 

Eye   Remedy    * 50 

Distemper  Remedy    1.00 

FREE    ADVICE     DEPARTMENT 

Our  Free  Advice  Department,  in  charge  of  experts,  is  at  the 
immediate  command  of  every  user  of  Sergeant's  Dog  Reme- 
dies, holding  our  Free  Advice  Coupon.  Every  inquiry  relative 
to  the  health  of  a  dog  takes  precedence  with  us  over  all  other 
correspondence. 

To  demonstrate  to  you  the  value  of  our 
Free  Advice  Department,  we  extend  to  you, 
as  the  owner  of  this  book,  sending  the 
coupon  attached,  the  privilege  of  asking 
for  one  letter  of  advice  relative  to  your 
dog's  health.  In  making  such  inquiry,  de- 
scribe fully  every  symptom  and  enclose 
stamp  for  reply. 


POLK  MILLER  DRUG  CO.,  Inc. 

Dept.  401,  RICHMOND,  VA. 


This  Coupon 
good  for  one  let- 
ter of  advice  and 
copy  of  Polk  Mil- 
ler Dog  Book 
FREE 


CHIHUAHUA'S  OF  BREEDING 


Mrs.  CHAS. 
DOBBS 

Audubon 
Park 

LOUISVILLE 
KENTUCKY 


Edgemere,    Pine   Lake   Ave., 


KAY  ESS  KENNELS 

(Registered) 

BLACK  and  TAN     TOY  TERRIERS 

For  twelve  years  have  exhibit- 
ed and  sold  more  of  this  breed 
than  any  other  kennel.  Have 
five  dogs  at  stud,  from  4^  to 
6  pounds. 

Mrs.  K.  SOPHIE  WATERS,  Prop. 

LA  PORTE.  IND. 


CHAMPION    DOG    BISCUIT 
Champion  Puppy  Meal 

|THE  BALANCED  RATION 

SEND  FOR  SAMPLE  AND  BOOKLET. 

Champion  Animal  Food  Co* 

ST.  PAUL,  MINN. 


CHINESE 

CHOW  CHOWS 

WE  BREED  AND  IMPORT  THEM — COLORS,  BLACK 
AND  RED. 

The  most  fashionable  dog  of  the  day.  Chows  are  a 
peculiar  dog,  great  thinkers,  not  much  on  the  bark,  not  easy 
to  get  acquainted  with,  (except  as  puppies).  Have  a  great 
brain,  an  exclusive  sort.  Shy  of  strangers,  but  when  you  get 
their  confidence  and  win  them  over,  you  have  secured  a  dog 
that  will  love  his  master  or  mistress  to  the  limit,  and  not 
care  much  for  anybody  else.  They  are  a  grand  watch  dog  and 
would  protect  you — be  on  duty  when  needed. 


WE  HAVE  AT  STUD 

•'MIDNIGHT  H,"  (black) Stud  Fee,  $25 

"IMP   OF  DARKNESS,"    (black) Stud  Fe«,  $25 

"CHING  CHANG,"   (red) Stud  Fee,  $25 

PUPPIES    FROM    $50    UP    TO    $100. 

The  Eberhart  Kennels 

CAMP  DENNISON,  OHIO. 


EBERHART'S 

DOG  REMEDIES 

EYE  LOTION  By  m  60c 


EBERHART'S  TONIC  PILLS 

Fifty  Pills  postpaid,  75c 

Hundred  Pills,  postpaid  $1.50 

Different  from  all  others,  containing  no  Arsenic  or  "dope." 
Work  wonders  in  building  up  run  down  dogs.  Always  do 
good — never   any   harm    or   bad   after   effects. 

EBERHARTS  SKIN  CURE 

EIGHT  OUNCE  BOTTLE  (go  only  by  express)  60c 

A  sure  cure  for  ALL  skin  diseases  in  dogs.  NON-POISONOUS. 
Instant  death  to  Lice  and  Fleas.  A  DIFFERENT  and  BETTER 
remedy  than  any  other  made.  A  wonderful  hair  grower, 
and  many  barbers  are  using  it  on  their  human  patrons' 
heads  for  skin  troubles,  and  to  promote  hair  growth. 

EBERHART'S  TAPE  WORM  REMEDY  by  mail  50c 

The  Best  ever  discovered,  absolutely  harmless,  nothing  like  it 

EBERHARTS  DOG  SOAP 

SUPERIOR  TO  ALL!  No  other  dog  soap  made  is  like  it. 
Contains  one  ingredient — a  secret — that  makes  it  Different 
From  All  Others.  Does  not  contain  carbolic  acid.  Is  NON- 
POISONOUS.  Eberhart's  Dog  Soap  is  made  from  a  purely 
vegetable  compound.  It  contains  no  free  alkali  or  other 
noxious  ingredient,  and  is  guaranteed  to  be  perfectly  harm- 
less to  the  coat,  skin  or  eyes  of  man  or  beast.  Any  animal 
may  lick  the  lather  off  without  injury.  It  promotes  free 
shedding  of  old  hair,  insuring  a  new  healthy  growth,  and 
leaves  the  coat  of  the  animal  soft  and  sleek.  KILLS  LICE 
and  FLEAS.  Made  as  cleanly  as  if  for  human  use,  and  for 
your  own  face  or  head,  NOTHING  IS  FINER.  Is  a  great  hair 
grower.  No  hair  tonic  made  is  better.  Cures  dandruff  or 
diseased  scalp. 

I  have  had  convincing  proofs  of  the  ill  effects  of  carbolic 
acid    and    carbolic    acid   soaps    on    dogs,    and   have    seen    that 
the  acid,  even  in  the  mild  form  of  soap,  will  poison  by  ab- 
sorption through  the  skin,  even  when  there  is  no  abrasion. 
IS  A  BLACK   SOAP,   BUT  JUST  THE  THING  FOR  WHITE 

DOGS. 
Quarter  pound  cake  by  mail  30c.     One  dozen  by  express  $2.50 

THE    EBERHART    KENNELS 

CAMP  DENNISON,   OHIO. 


A  NATION'S  DOG  REMEDIES! 


VERM  I  LAX 

SUPREME 

DOG  REMEDIES 

(DR.  DELANEXS) 

USED  for  the  sledge  clogs 
of  frozen  Alaska  and 
by  breeders  and  one 
dog  owners  from  Cape  Cod 
to  Golden  Gate.  Winners 
of  the  Gold  Medal  and 
Highest  Award  of  Merit  at 
the  Panama-Pacific  Inter- 
national Exposition. 

They're  good.  Try  them 
"For  Your  Dog's  Sake." 

Sold  by  Druggists.  Pet 
Shops,  Sporting  Goods 
Stores  or  sent  direct  by 
Parcels   Post. 


Blood   Purifying  Tablets $0.50 

Cankered  Ear  Lotion 50 

Chorea  Tablets .50 

Condition  Tablets   50 

Cough  Syrup    50 

Diarrhoea  Tablets   50 

Digestive    Tablets    50 

Distemper  Remedy    1.00 

Eye  Lotion   50 

Fever   Tablets    50 

Fit  Tablets   50 

Flea   Powder    25 

Germicide  and   Disinfectant...     .50 

Gum    Set    50 

Kidney    Tablets    50 

Laxative  Tablets   50 

Liniment    50 


Mango  Remedy  (Special  Stain- 
less)      1.00 

Mange    Remedy    (Standard)...     .50 

Mouth   Wash    50 

Rheumatic  Tablets   50 

Shampoo   (VENO)    50 

Shampoo    (Deodorizing) 50 

Skin   Cleanser    (for  large   dogs     .50 
Skin  Cleansing  Cream   (for  toy 

dogs  and  puppies)    50 

Soap   (animal)    25 

Soap   (toy  dog  and  puppy) 25 

Tonic   Tablets    50 

VERM1LAX   Supreme    Worm 

Remedy     50 

and  $1.00 


VERMILAX  COMPANY,  Inc., 


>5l   FIFTH  AVENUE, 


NEW  YORK   CITY 


WILBUR  H.  PURCELL      THE  SHOW  MAN 


29  BROADWAY,  NEW  YORK  CITY,  N.  Y. 

30  YEARS  EXPERIENCE  I  Furnish  everything  for 

EXPERIENCE   COUNTS.  Your   Show,   Will   Manage 
WRITE  FOR  TERMS.  Your  Show,  and  Furnish 

KENNEL  AND  HORSE  SHOWS  Catalogues,  Ribbons,  Medals, 
A  SPECIALTY.  Trophies,  Etc. 


CHOW  CHOWS 

EXCLUSIVELY 


MANDARIN 
OF  BAINBRIDGE 

Stud  Fee  $50.00 


GREENACRE 
HUMMER 

Stud  Fee  $30.00 


Also  MR.  CHANG 

Stud  Fee  $25.00 

PUPPIES  AND  GROWN  STOCK  FOR   SALE 


For  Further  Particulars  Address 

BAINBRIDGE     KENNELS 

Queens  Boulevard  and  Jefferson  Street 
JAMAICA,  N.  Y. 


TAI  MAIU  KENNELS 

Miss  JEAN  ADAMS,  Foochow,  China,  Owner 

Chow  Chows 

exclusively  from 
pedigreed  prize 
winning  stock 


Puppies  from   $50 
to  $100 


Champion 
WU  TING  FANG  II 

at  Stud 
Fee  $35.00 


These  kennels  are  in  America,  at  CAMP  DENNISON, 
OHIO,  under  the  personal  management  of  AL.  G.  EBERHART, 
where  address  all  mail  and  send  bitches  for  service. 


BEAGLES 

This  kennel  breeds  from 
100  to  200  yearly.  Many 
Field  Trial  and  Bench 
Show  Winners  among  our 
Stud  Dogs  and  Brood 
Bitches.  The  Best  Only, 
is  our  motto.  Dogs  at 
public  service. 
PUPPIES  USUALLY 

FOR    SALE 

F.  B.  ZIMMER,  ('Debonair') 

Drawer  E. 
GLOVERSVILLE,  N.  Y. 


POHL'S  IRISH  SETTERS 

Send  $1.00  for 
Pohl's  PortTo- 
lio  on  Irish 
Setters.  Con- 
tains descrip- 
tion and  his- 
tory of  Irish 
Setters,  also  a 
Dutone  print, 
8x10  for  fram- 
ing, of  Ch. 
Drug  Law 
and  Ch.  Pat- 
A-Belle. 

OTTO  POHL,  Fremont,  Nebraska 

DEPARTMENT  B 

BLACK  and  TAN  TOY  TERRIERS 

The  miniature  specimens  with   the  proper  heads  and  correct 
markings.     We  raise,  sell  and  exhibit.     Puppies  from  $25  up. 

CHAMPION  "KAY  ESS  BILLY"  AT  STUD.     FEE,  $10. 

HOBART     KRANER 

61  WELSH  AVE.,  COLUMBUS,  OHIO. 

WHEN  IN  A  HURRY  FOR 

or  VERMILAX  FLEA  POWDER,  30c.  by  mail. 
CLAYTON'S    DISTEMPERINE    OR   VERMIFUGE 
SERGEANT'S  SURE  SHOT  OR  CONDITION  PILLS 
STANDARD  DISINFECTANT 
VERMILAX  SUPREME  WORM  REMEDY,  60c.  by  mail 

SEND  YOUR    the     C"BERHART 
ORDERS  TO  [.KENNELS 

CAMP  DENNISON,  OHIO 


THE  CAERPHILLY  AIREDALE  KENNELS, 


ONTARIO 


PETER  BAWDEN.  Owner 


This  kennel 
contains  the 
import  e  d 
prize  w  in- 
ning: bitches, 
"SwaleLady," 
"  Caerphil- 
ly Betty," 
"(iomerton 
II  <•  r  o  i  ne," 
"Frankland's 

Wanda," 
"Caerphilly 
Milkmaid  ," 
and  the  two 
import  e  d 
Stud  Dogs, 
"Crack  Per- 
former" and 
home  bred 
''Duke  of 
_  Kent . " 

"CAERPHILLY  MARVEL" 

Puppies  from  this  kennel  have  made  good  in  every  part  of  the 
continent,  both  as  workers,  companions  and  show  dogs.  Special 
care  is  taken  in  rearing  puppies,  and  nothing  but  high-class  stock 
sent  out.  Our  prices  are  usually  lower  than  the  big  kennels,  and 
the  quality  usually  higher. 

IP  YOU  GET  A  CAERPHILLY  AIREDALE,  YOU  GET  THE  BEST. 


a, 

■ 

^^Jr**  r~'    '111 

^■k^r'-^J 

12 

M^'iii^-'  m,ml"*!itl& 

Hi.        A        C       V%*~:nV„     WORM   EXPELLER  50c 

i-T.     -^V.     V^«      LyanicI  S     PUPPY   VERMIFUGE        -     50c 

S  DRIVE  THE  WORMS  from  YOUR  DOG  and  PUPPY 
Distemper  Tablets 50 
Tonic  Pills,  for  Toy  and  Puppies 50 
Restorative  Tablets,  for  dogs 50 
Diarrhoea  Tablets 50 
Mange  Remedy  50 
Flea  Powder,  Dog  Soap,  each 25 
Daniels'  Shampoo  Soap. 10 


Imported  Airedale  Terrier 

Studholme  Sultan 


A.  K.  C.  195025        E.  K.  C.  533  P 

Studholme  Sultan  is  a  "laster" 
himself  and  comes  from  a  family 
of  dogs  and  bitches  that  have  been 
remarkable  for  their  lasting  qual- 
ities, and  have  never  grown  thick 
and  coarse  as  so  many  strains  of 
Airedales  do.  He  is  the  shortest  coupled,  heaviest  boned  dog 
before  the  public,  and  is  a  proper  type  to  use  on  small  weedy 
bitches.     Weight   50   pounds. 

C.    C.    LOOMIS 

Send  for   Stud   Card.  St.   Matthews,  Ky. 

Fee  $15.00  Box  E,   23. 


IF  YOU 
WANT 

to  BUY  a 

OF    ANY    BREED,      and 

will  send  your  order  to 
me,  I  will  furnish  it  from 
any  of  the  first-class  Ken- 
nels whose  advertisement 
you  see  in  this  book, 


AT  THEIR  PRICE 

Dog  will  be  exactly  as 
represented,  and  you  will 
be   satisfied. 

AL.  G.  EBERHART 

CAMP  DENNISON,  OHIO. 


\||gP=sIn  writing  to  any  of  these  advertisers,  please 
mention  that  you  saw  their  Ad  in  this  book.     This 
will  be  doing  a  good  turn  to  them--to  yourself-and— 
"EVERYTHING  ABOUT  DOGS." 


ENGLISH  PUGS 

FAWNS  and  BLACKS 


We  are  the  OLDEST  Pug  breeders 
in  America,  started  in  them  forty 
years  ago,  ami  at  the  present  time, 
there  are  only  two  other  Pug 
breeders  in  the  United  States,  both 
of  them  having  either  bought  from 
us,  or  bred  to  our  stud  dogs.  Pugs 
Are  Scarce  and  in  great  demand. 


We  can  occasionly  furnish  puppies 

Fawn's  $25  to  $35 
Black's  $35  to  $50 


DOGS  AT  STUD       both  colors      FEE  $10  and  $15 

A  Wonderfully 
INTELLIGENT 

and  Loving 

Pet  is  a  Pug, 

a  Great 

House  Dog 

The  Eberhart  Kennels 

CAMP  DENNISON,  OHIO 


NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 


LeGallee  Bros. 

Sanitary  Shipping 
Crates 

The  strong,  sanitary, 
shipping  crates  known  the 
world  over  for  their  spe- 
cial features,  the  water 
fountain  and  sanitary  de- 
vice, protecting  the  health 
of  the  dog. 
EviElp!  ir»'f>R        "     fS  With  all  other  manufac- 

SiiTSlBi         *m    fniwjB  turers  we  have  heen  oblig- 

W"'m|B         ™L  ^~SA  '"'    '"    r:lis''  prices   flf- 

* t nfe>?  JmSjL **~^  ^b        teen  per  cent,  hut  this  in- 

crease, with  our  former 
low  prices,  still  enables  us 
to  offer  the  strongest, 
cheapest  crate  on  the  mar- 
ket. 
SIZES  AND  PRICES  OF  DOGGIES'   SI*ECIAL   SHIPPING    (KATES. 

1—22  in.   long,   1  6in.   wide,  18  in.   high    $  9.20 

2 — 28  in.  long,  20  in.   wide,  22   in.   high    11.50 

3 — 34  in.   long,  24   in.   wide,  26  in.   high    12.65 

4 — 38   in.  long,   26  in.   wide,  28  in.   high    17.25 

5—40  in.   long,  26  in.   wide,  32   in.  high    18.40 

6 — 46  in.   long,  32   in   wide,   36   in.    high    24.15 

Other  sizes  made  to  order.     Height  measurements  from   gable  to   floor. 
"Write  for  booklet. 

L  E     GALLEE     BROS. 
OLIVE  STREET,  BRIDGEPORT,  CONN. 


STANDARD   DISINFECTANT 

A  disinfectant  of  many  years'  standing,  used  continually  by  many  of  the 
best  Kennels  in  this  country,  and  has  proven  to  be  as  good  as  any  made, 
superior  to  some,  for  all  purposes  a  disinfectant  is  needed.  See  what  the 
author  of  this  book  says,  who  has  used  it  for  years,  and  is  today  using  it. 
This  was  written  in  1902. 


FROM  AX.  G.  EBERHART,  THE  WELL  KNOWN  KENNEL  MAN, 
OF  CAMP   DENNISON,   OHIO: 

"I  received  the  one  gallon  of  your  Standard  Disinfectant ;  have 
fully  tried  it,  and  it  is  all  right.  I  have  used  all  the  different  dis- 
infectants in  my  kennels,  and  it  is  enough  to  say  I  will  now  use 
yours.     Please  ship  me  live  gallons." 


This  alone  should  be  enough  to  convince  you,  as  everyone  that  knows  Al.  G. 
Eberhart  has  explicit  confidence  in  what  he  says. 

We  have  other  testimonials  by  the  thousands,  which  space  will  not  allow 
us  to  print  here. 

STANDARD  DISINFECTANT  kills  fleas  and  cures   skin   diseases   on   dogs; 

can  be  used  around  the  stable,  and  is  the  best  friend  the  house-keeper  ever  had. 

ROBERT   S.   WEST,  Proprietor, 

STANDARD     DISINFECTANT      CO., 

PERRY,    OHIO. 

The  Eberhart  Kennels,  Camp  Dennison,  Ohio,  will  fill  orders  at  $1.50  per  gallon. 


It  affords  me  great  pleas- 
ure to  now  call  your  at- 
tention to 


MY  ADVERTISERS 


Selected  from  the  leading  kennels  only — and 
quite  important  to  dog-interested  people  to 
know  where  a  dog  of  the  right  sort  can  be 
bought  at  a  right  price — from  the  right 
people.  Every  one  of  them  will  treat  you  square.  Most  of  them 
I  know  personally,  and  in  ordering,  you  can,  with  perfect 
safety,  send  the  money  with  the  order  (not  necessary  to  have 
the  dog  sent  on  approval),  for  they  will  ship  you  a  dog  ex- 
actly as  represented — that  will  please  and  satisfy  you. 

Read  the  Advertisements! 

THEY  ARE  ALSO  VALUABLE. 

With  a  feeling  of  pride,  I  now  introduce  to  your  notice  the 
most  select  lot  of  advertisements  that  have  ever  appeared  in 
a  Dog  Book.  AL.  G.   EBEkHART 

PLEASE  MENTION  THIS  BOOK  WHEN  WRITING. 

CANINE  BOARDING  HOUSE 

DOGS    TAKEN     TO     BOARD 

TERMS — :$7   to   $10  per  month,  according  to  size — 

PAYABLE  IN  ADVANCE. 

NO  DOGS  TAKEN  SUFFERING  WITH  DISTEMPER  OR 

MANGE. 
CAN  TAKE  ECZEMA  CASES  TO  TREAT  AT  FIFTY  CENTS 

PER    DAY — MEDICINES    CHARGED    EXTRA. 
OUR   Kennels    are    beautifully    located    on    the    Little    Miami 
River,  at  Camp   Dennison,   Ohio,   sixteen   miles   out   of 
Cincinnati,  forty  minutes'  ride  on  the  Penna.  R.  R. 

We  have  large  grounds,  seventeen  individual  yards,  en- 
closed by  high  and  secure  fences.  Sleeping  kennel  in  each  of 
these  yards,  the  yards  opening  to  a  large  paddock,  where  all 
dogs  are  given  exercise  three  times  a  day.  Plenty  of  shade 
and  grass,  and  everything  conducive  to  health,  happiness  and 
safety  of  dogs. 

While  same  care  is  given  each  dog  as  if  it  were  our  own, 
yet  we  assume  no  responsibility  as  to  accidents.  Dogs  are  at 
owner's  risk. 

VISITORS  ALWAYS  WELCOME,  BUT  PREFER  VISITS  BY 
APPOINTMENT. 

THE  EBERHART  KENNELS,  camp  dennison,  ohio. 

CINCINNATI  OFFICE.   2  3  EAST  SIXTH  STREET. 


POINTERS  of  Quality  \  Royal  Breeding 


"FISHELS   FRANK" 

If  you  are  looking  for  a  Pointer,  any  age,  I  would  be 
pleased  to  mail  you  my  catalog  and  special  list.  Puppies 
any  age,  Broken  dogs,  Brood  bitches — for  sale.  Write  me 
your  wants. 

IN  THE  STUD 

Champion  "Comanche  Frank,"  Champion  "Amaud 
Ham,"  "Fishel's  Rush,"  "Jankes  Jingo  Sam,"  "Raps 
Dandy." 

SHOOTING  DOGS  EDUCATED. 

U.  R.    FISHEL,      box  a-i       hope,   ind. 

CONNER'S READYT0  FEED  C00KED  D0G  F00D 

IS  THE  BEST      EXPERIENCE  PROVES 

If  you  are  not  using  it,  why  not  try  it? 

We  guarantee  satisfaction  in  every  way. 

It  is  a  great  Food  for  puppies  as  well  as  old 

dogs. 
Write  for  booklet  of  testimonials. 
$3.75  per  100  lbs.      $3.50  per  100  lbs.  in   500 

lb.  lots. 

The  Eberhart  Kennels  Use  It,  and  Have  For  Years. 

M.  J.    CONNER 

40  WATER  ST.,  BATTLE  CREEK,  MICH. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


Assortment  of  Cures 205-215 

Bench  Shows    263-264 

Breeding — By  Harry  W.  Lacy £78-279 

Breeding  and  Raising  Puppies    228-238 

Comfortable  Winter  Quarters    287 

Definition  of  Terms  Relating  to  Dogs 290-294 

Diseases  of  Dogs  Alphabetically  Listed 9-161 

Disinfectants 2S2-2S3 

Distemper 162-181 

Dog  Papers  of  Record 238 

Dogs  as  Children's  Pets 264-265 

Drugs  and  How  to  Use  Them "83-287 

Feeding  the  Dog    223-227 

Feeding  Puppies — By  Harry  W.  Lacy 280-282 

How  to  Wash  a  Dog 260-261 

Hydrophobia 182-204 

Introductory  Remarks 5-8 

Kennels  Points  and  Don'ts 274-278 

Kennel    Suggestions    271-274 

Medical  Terms 288-289 

Miscellaneous  Information  of  Great  Value    216-222 

Pathos — Selection    265 

Poms  on  Dogs — "Listed  Wrong" 262 

Poetry  About  Dogs 266-267 

Senator  Vest's  Famous  Plea  on  Behalf  of  the  Dog 295 

Separating  Dogs  When  Fighting    282 

Special  Article  on  Puppies 257-258 

The  Author's  Creed 3 

The  Author's  Tribute  to  the  Dog 26  7 

The  Dogless  Boy 260 

The  Modern  Kennel — How   to   Build    268-271 

The  Teeth  of  the  Dog 254-256 

Useful  Information  and  Suggestions  Regarding  Dogs 239-253 


INDEX  TO  ADVERTISEMENTS 


American  Fancier  and  Stock-Keeper  (Weekly)    255 

American  Field  Publishing  Company  (Weekly) 4 

Bainbridge  Kennels   (Chow  Chows)    .' 300 

Black  and  Tan  Toy  Terriers  (Hans  Hirsch) 145 

C.  C.  Loomis  (Airedales)    312 

C.  S.  R.  Blue  Book  Specialties 241 

Champion  Animal  Food  Company    30  4 

Common  Sense  Remedy  Company  (Dog  Medicines)    237 

Conner's  Ready  to  Feed  Cooked  Dog  Food 303 

Dogdom    (Monthly  Publication)    249 

Dog  World  Publishing  Company  (Monthly  Paper)    259 

Dr.  A.  C.  Daniels'  Dog  Remedies 311 

Eberhart  Dog  Remedies    29S 

E.  L.  Pickhardt  (Sterling  Collie  Kennels)    245 

Elmview  Kennels  (German  Shepherd  Dogs)    127 

Eczema  Remedy  Company 145 

English  Pugs    (Eberhart   Kennels)     301 

F.  H.  Bennett  Biscuit  Company 171 

F.  B.  Zimmer  ("Debonair")   Beagles 309 

H.  Clay  Glover,  V.  S.,    (Glover  Imperial  Dog  Remedies)    302 

Hobart  Kraner   (Black  and  Tan  Terriers)    310 

Hounds  and  Hunting   (Monthly)    294 

If  You  Want  to  Buy  a  Dog  (Eberhart)    296 

Kay  Ess  Kennels   (Mrs.  K.  Sophie  Waters)    Black  and  Tans 304 

LeGalle  Brothers  (Sanitary  Shipping  Crates)    306 

Massasoit  Kennels  (Boston  Terriers 145 

Melbourne  Kennels  (English  Bulldogs)    133 

Melita  Kennels  (Maltese  Terriers)    151 

Mrs.  Charles  Dobbs   (Chihuahuas)    304 

Mrs.  Wilbur  Kirkby  Hitchcock  (Old  English  Sheepdogs)    165 

Pohl's  Irish  Setters  (Otto  Pohl)    310 

Polk  Miller  Drug  Company,  Inc.   (Sergeant's  Dog  Remedies)    303 

Reilly  Pug  Kennels 157 

Richwood  Kennels  (Walter  McRoberts)  Irish  Setters 175 

Standard  Disinfectant  Company 306 

Sterling  Collie  Kennels  (Mr.  Edwin  L.  Pickhardt)    139 

Tai  Maiu  Kennels  of  Chows   (Miss  Jean  Adams)    309 

The  Caerphilly  Airedale  Kennels   (Peter  Bawden)    311 

The  Dog  Fancier  (Monthly) 296 

The  Eberhart  Kennels  (Chinese  Chow  Chows)    297 

The  Vermilax  Company 299 

Tokio  Kennels  (Mrs.  L.  E.  Domler)  Japanese  Spaniels  and  Pekingese  .  .  .  .165 

U.  R.  Fishel   (Pointers  of  Quality)    308 

Wilbur  H.  Purcell  (The  Show  Man)    299 


USE 

CLAYTON'S 
MANGE  REMEDY 

FOR  FALLING  HAIR 
AND  DANDRUFF 

FOR  THE  HUMAN  SCALP 


CLAYTON'S  CEOLINE  DOG  WASH 

It  is  a  perfect  disinfectant  for  any  and  all      TO  DISINFECT 
purposes  for  which  a  disinfectant  is  used.      YOUR  KENNEL 
SURE  DEATH  TO  FLEAS. 

Clayton's  KiLflea  Powder,  the  Dog's  Toilet  Powder  for  Fleas 
Clayton's  Distemperine  and  Clayton's   Distemperine  Tablets 

Prevent,  as  well  as  cure,  and  are  the  recognized  Specific  for  Distemper. 
Clayton's  Mange  Remedy  and  Clayton's  Skin  Lotion 

Are  guaranteed  to  cure  all  forms  of  Skin  Disease,  Destroys  all  Parasites, 
Promotes  the  growth  of  Hair,  and  Heals  the  Skin. 


FOR  WASHING 
YOUR  DOG 


A  HINT  TO   .   . 
THE  WISE,  Etc. 


Use  Clayton's  Method  in  rearing  your  puppies. 
Clayton     Vermifuge     and     Clayton's     Puppy     Tonic 

is  what  you  must  have  if  you  want  to  raise  them  all. 


CLAYTON'S  VERMIFUGE 

Can  be  given  to  all  dogs  at  any  age  after  ten  days  old. 

Full  List  of  Clayton's  Remedies,  with  Price  by  Mail. 

By 

Mail 
60c 
60c 

00c 

eoc 


Clayton's  Mange  Remedy...  50c 

Clayton's  Skin  Lotion 50c 

Clayton's  Hair  Tonic 50c 

Clayton's  Distemperine 50c 

Clayton's  Distemperine  Tab- 
lets    50c 

Clayton's   CONDITION 

PILLS  with  Pepsin 50c 

Clayton's    Blood    Purifying 

Pills  50c 

Clayton's  Digestive  Tablets  50c 
Clayton's  Laxative  Pills  . . .  50c 
Clayton's   Tape   Worm    Ex- 

peller  50c 

Clayton's  Vermifuge 50c 

Clayton's  Canker  Lotion  . . .  50c 
Clayton's     Canker     Lotion 

Tablets   50c 

Clayton's  Eye  Lotion 50c 


50c 

50c 

50c 
50c 
50c 

50c 
60c 
60c 

50c 
60c 


By 

Mall 
Clayton's  Eye  Lotion  Tab- 
lets     50c  50c 

Clayton's  Fit  Remedy 50c  60c 

Clayton's  Fit  Remedy  Tab- 
lets     50c  50c 

Clayton's  Diarrhea  Cure  . . .  50c  60c 

Clayton's  Diarrhea  Remedy  50c  60c 

Clayton's  Cough  Remedy...  50c  60c 

Clayton's  Sulphur  Tablets..  50c  50c 

Clayton's  Puppy  Tonic 50c  60c 

Clayton's    Rheumatic    Tab- 
lets    50c  50c 

Clayton's  Goitre  Remedy.  $1.00  $1.00 

Clayton's  Ceoline  Dog  Wash  25c  35c 

Clayton's  Ceoline  Dog  Soap  10c  15c 

Clayton's  Shampoo 25c  30c 

Clayton's  Crean  Dog  Soap..  20c  25c 

Clayton's  Kilflea  Soap 25c  30c 

Clayton's  Kilflea  Powder...  25c  30c 


Olayton's  Remedies  are  for  sale  by  all  Sporting  Goods  Houses,  Drug  Storey 
and  Bird  Stores. 
Send  2c  stamp  for  Dr.  Clayton's  Treatise  on  the  Dog,  or  ask  your  dealer  for  one. 

Manufactured  by 
DR.  GEO.  W.  CLAYTON,  1810  Wabash  Ave.,  Chicago. 


The  Eberhart  Kennels,  Camp  Dennison,  Ohio,  Will  Furnish  the 
Above  Remedies. 


Anything  Pertaining  to  Dogs  Can  be  Found  in  the  Columns    of 


FIELD 

*&  AIM  I>  *& 

FANCY 

14  Church  St.    New  York  City 


V  A  Weekly 
Journal  of 
Record  for  the 
Gun,  Field 
Trials  &  Dog 
Shows,  &  Dog 
Fanciers. 


THE  leading  weekly  on  canine  sub- 
jects. Containing  special  and 
feature  articles,  and  the  best  reports  of 
the  dog  shows.  $2.00  per  year.  Send 
for  sample  copies. 


The    Field    and    Fancy    Rook  Department 
furnishes  any  Book  for  and  about  the  Dog. 


FIELD  AND  FANCY 

14-16  CHURCH  STREET 
NEW  YORK  CITY 


The  Field  and   Fancy   Publishing   Corporation   is 
equipped  to  handle  all  Printing  for  Dog  Fanciers 


Field  and  Fancy  Print,   New  York  City. 


Webster  Family  Library  of  Veterinary  Medicine 
Cummings  School  ot  Veterinary  Medicine  at 

Tufts  University 


200  Westboro  Road 


 












