 

COMFORTABLE  WINTER QUARTERTS.

Dogs  that  are  not  allowed  to  sleep  in  your  house,  must  have  a  com- 
fortable house  or  kennel  provided  for  them,  where  they  can  sleep  warm 
enough  in  it  at  night,  or,  in  very  cold  weather,  to  go  into  during  the  day. 
At  my  kennels,  I  have  twenty-four  individual  yards,  (aside  from  three  large 
exercising  yards),  and  in  each  individual  yard  a  small  kennel  prepared 
as  follows:  I  buy  an  empty  upright  piano  box,  set  it  on  a  foundation  ten 
inches  from  the  ground,  put  a  second  floor  in,  between  which  is  tar  paper; 
put  a  door  in  front,  three  feet  high,  two  wide,  to  only  close  part  way,  so 
dog  can  get  in.  Then  I  make  a  slanting  roof  and  cover  this  and  front  of 
box  with  tin,  or  some  composition  roofing,  the  sides  and  back  being  bat- 
tened where  the  boards  join  together,  so  no  cold  air  gets  in.  Now,  be- 
fore hanging  the  door,  build  inside  an  inner  sleeping  compartment  on  one 
side,  boarded  on  top  and  half  of  the  front,  a  board  six  inches  high  across 
bottom  to  keep  the  straw  in,  and  for  winter  use  tack  some  carpet  over 
the  front  of  this  sleeping  box  you  have  made,  and  also  several  thicknesses 
of  covering  the  opening  made  for  the  door,  fastened  only  at  the  top,  the 
dog  will  push  through  this  covering  and  into  his  bedroom,  and  with  plenty 
of  straw  for  bedding,  will  sleep  warm  and  comfortable.  If  you  have  two 
dogs  that  are  congenial,  it  is  all  the  better  that  they  sleep  together.  Small 
dogs  with  short  coats  and  toy  dogs,  are  kept  in  an  L  of  my  house,  with  a 
stove  that  never  goes  out  'till  spring  comes,  for  such  dogs  require  a  heated 
place  in  cold  weather.  Dogs  such  as  collies,  setters,  pointers,  and  large 
dogs  can  stand  it  all  right  outdoors,  if  the  place  is  provided  as  I  have  de- 
scribed. The  carpet  on  the  front  of  the  inner  room  should  have  a  part  or 
corner  of  it  cut  off,  or  fastened  back,  making  a  small  opening  for  air. 
Have  your  kennel  facing  south  so  as  to  get  the  great  benefit  of  the  sun. 

For  kennel  locations  choose  ground  that  lies  high  and  dries  quickly. 
Heavy  soil  on  which  water  rests  instead  of  draining  away  freely  is  condu- 
cive to  all  sorts  of  troubles.  However  expensive  a  kennel,  it  can  never 
be  suitable  for  dogs  unless  perfectly  dry,  for  dampness  causes  much  sick- 
ness. If  there  is  one  thing  more  than  another  a  dog  cannot  stand,  it  is 
dampness.  He  requires  plenty  of  water  to  drink,  but  none  in  his  bed.  It 
is  the  underpart  of  his  body  that  has  the  least  protection. 