


288  MEDICAL  TERMS. 

MEDICAL    TERMS. 


(This  classification  of  drugs  and  explanations  is  given  because  the 
terms  are  used  to  avoid  verbosity). 

Alteratives. — Medicines  which,  if  given  in  small  and  repeated  doses 
gradually  bring  about  a  healthy  state  of  the  system  without  seriously  aug- 
menting the  secretions — such  as  arsenic  and  its  preparations,  iodide  of  po- 
tassium, etc. 

Anesthetics. — Chloroform,  or  ether,  drugs  that  deprive  of  sensation  or 
feeling.  t  ..^^ 

Anodynes. — Morphine   or   cocaine,   drugs   that   assuage  pain. 

Antiseptics. — Medicines  that  resist  or  check  putrefaction,  such  as  chlor- 
ide of  lime,  carbolic  acid,  soda,  creosote,  etc. 

Antispasmodics. — Medicine  that  overcomes  inordinate  muscular  action, 
from  their  sedative  effects  allaying  spasms  and  convulsions,  as  chloroform 
or  opium. 

Aperients. — See  Cathartics. 

Astringents. — Drugs   used   internally  that  contract  muscular   fiber  and 

check  diarrhea,  hemorrhage  and  diabetes,  used  extensively  to  stop 
bleeding  and  diminish  discharge  from  wounds,  such  as  alum,  gallic  acid,  etc. 

Blisters. — Agents  used  as  counter  irritants  for  internal  inflammation. 
Strong  liquid  ammonia  being  a  good  and  quick  blister  for  a  dog;  it  may  be 
applied  on  a  cloth  or  sponge  held  on  the  part  to  be  blistered  for  about  ten 
minutes.  Spirits  of  turpentine  is  also  good;  wring  a  piece  of  red  flannel 
out  of  hot  water,  sprinkle  with  turpentine,  and  apply  to  the  part.  Pure 
olive  oil  should  afterward  be  applied  to  blistered  parts. 

Cordials. — Medicines  that  increase  strength,  stimulate  the  stomach 
and  animate  the  spirits.  Cordials  are  often  given  to  hunting  dogs  after 
a  hard  day's  work  in  the  field.     Here  is  a  good  one  to  use. 

Cordiane  Ball. — Take  powdered  cardamon  seeds  1  dram,  oil  of  carra- 
ways  10  drops,  oil  of  cloves  5  drops,  powdered  gum  acacia  %  dram,  made 
into  a  paste  with  syrup;  dose  for  a  greyhound  or  hunting  dogs  is  one- 
fourth  of  this,  given  wrapped  in  an  ounce  of  lean  mutton. 

Carminatives. — Medicines  that  expel  wind,  such  as  oil  of  peppermint, 
ginger,   etc. 

Cathartics,  Purgatives,  Aperients. — Medicines  to  cause  discharges, 
cleansing  stomach   and  bowels.      Laxatives  and  mild  aperients. 

Caustics. — Agents  that  destroy  or  decompose  parts  to  which  they  are 
applied,  used  for  proud  flesh  in  wounds,  to  destroy  warts,  to  sear  the  parts 
and  prevent  absorption  of  virus  in  case  of  bites,  etc.,  etc.  Nitrate  of  silver, 
carbolic  acid,  nitric  acid  or  the  hot  iron  are  the  most  active. 

Demulcents. — Agents  to  soften  effecs  of  irritants,  by  sheathing  the 
surface,  such  as  glycerine,  gum  acacia,  and  are  used  as  a  vehicle  in  giving 
such  irritating  articles  as  turpentine,  oil  of  male  fern,  and  many  others. 

Diaphoretics. — Medicines  to  produce  sweating,  as  sweet  spirits  of  nitre. 

Diuxetics, — Remedies  which  increase  discharge  of  urine,  such  as  nitrate 
of  potash,  Venice  turpentine,  balsam  copabia,  etc. 


MEDICAL  TERMS.  289 

Emetics. — Agents  used  to  produce  vomiting.  A  dog's  stomach  is  very 
easily  acted  on.  Numerous  medicines  are  used.  Ipecacuanha  wine  is  easy 
in  its  effects.  Emetic  tartar  and  common  salt  are  useful  emetics.  .  Dogs 
eat   grass   to   produce   vomiting. 

Emollients. — Agents  that  soften  or  relax  the  parts  applied  to,  such  as 
poultices,  camphorated  oil,  olive  oil  and  fomentations. 

Laxatives. — See  Cathartics. 

Narcotics. — Medicines  to  produce  sleep  and  relieve  pain.  Morphine  is 
used  mostly  for  the  dog. 

Purgatives. — See  Cathartics. 

Stimulants. — Medicine  and  liquors  used  to  produce  immediate  but  tem- 
porary increase  of  strength;  given  in  collapse,  exhaustion,  or  in  excessive 
debility,  when  fever  is  not  present.  Sherry  wine  clear,  whisky  with  a  little 
water  added,   or   good  port  wine,   are   good. 

Stomachics  and  Tonics. — Medicines  to  excite  and  strengthen  the  stom- 
ach. Tonics  are  especially  good  in  cases  of  debility  following  fever,  dis- 
temper and  lowering  diseases;  mostly  used  for  the  dog  are,  quinine,  iron, 
gentian,  rhubarb  ,etc.  There  are  several  condition  pills  now  put  up,  espe- 
cially for  dogs.  Sergeants'  Condition  Pills,  Glover's  Tonic  and  Dent's 
Condition  Pills  are  all  good.  Dr.  Glover's  is  in  liquid  form.  Either  of 
these  will  do  the  work. 

Vermifuge. — Medicines  to   destroy   or   expel   worms. 

Clysters  or  Enemas. — These  agents  are  mostly  in  the  liquid  form,  and 
are  administered  for  various  purposes,  as  the  softening  and  removal  of 
hardened  fceces,  the  allaying  of  spasm  or  colic  in  the  bowels,  the  destruction 
of  worms,  for  checking  diarrhea,  and  more  rarely  for  nourishing  the  body. 
The  forms  for  clysters  will  be  found  in  the  parts  of  the  work  treating  of 
these  ailments  in  which  they  are  used.  The  means  of  injecting  the  clyster 
is  usually  the  common  bladder  and  pipe  sold  by  druggists  at  2  5  cents 
each,  or  what  is  greatly  better,  an  india  rubber  bottle  enema,  which  gives 
the  operator  greater  power,  and  is  itself  less  trouble,  being  self-filling.