 


290  TERMS  RELATING  TO  DOGS. 

DEFINITION  OP  TERMS  RELATING  TO  DOGS. 


Apple  Headed. — Skull  round,  instead  of  flat,  on  top. 

Babbler. — A  dog  that  gives  too  much  tongue  when  working. 

Beefy. — Big,  beefy  hindquarters. 

Belton. —  (Blue  and  lemon)  spotted  or  flecked,  and  applied  to  Laverick 
Setters. 

Blaze. — A  white  mark  or  stripe  up  the  face. 

Blood. — A  dog  which  shows  high  breeding. 

Breeching. — The  tan-colored  hairs  on  the  back  of  the  thighs  of  a 
Black-and-tan  Terrier. 

Broken-up  Face. — Refers  more  particularly  to  the  face  of  the  Bulldog 
or  Toy  Spaniel,  and  comprises  the  receding  nose,  or  lay-back,  deep  stop,  and 
wrinkle. 

Burr. — The  inside  of  the  ears. 

Brisket. — That  part  of  the  body  in  front  of  the  cnest,  or  the  chest. 

Brush. — The  long  fringe  of  hair  on  under  side  of  tail  of  long-haired 
dogs. 

Butterfly  Nose. — A  nose  with  spotted  nostrils. 

Button-Ear. — An  ear  which  falls  over  in  front,  concealing  the  mside, 
as   in  Fox  Terrier. 

Cat-footed. — A  short,  round  foot,  with  knuckles  high  and  well  devel- 
oped.    A  desirable  foot  for  all  running  dogs. 

Chaps  or  Chops. — The  pendulous  lips  of  the  bulldog;  the  foreface  of 
a  bulldog. 

Character. — Pronounced  indications  of  the  breed  to  which  the  dog  be- 
longs; also,  marked  indications  of  intelligence. 

Cheeky. — When  the  cheek  bumps  are  strongly  defined;  thick  in  cheek. 

Chest. — The  chest  of  a  dog  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  brisket; 
the  breast  or  chest  extends  between  the  fore-legs  from  the  brisket  to  the 
belly. 

Cloddy  or  Cobby. — Thick-set,  short-coupled,  and  low  in  stature. 

Cobby. — Well  ribbed  up,   short  and  compact  in  build. 

Comb-fringe. — The  long  hair  that  hangs  down  from  the  tail  of  the 
setter. 

Condition. — In  good  health,  flesh  and  coat. 

Couplings. — The  length  of  space  between  the  tops  or  tne  shoulder 
blades  and  the  tops  of  the  hip  joints.  The  term  denotes  the  proportionate 
length  of  the  dog,  such  as  long  and  short  in  the  couplings. 

Cow-Hocked. — The    hocks    turning    inwards. 

Crank-tail — Same  as  above. 

Crest. — The  upper  ridge  or  portion  of  the  dog's  neck.  Generally  ap- 
plied to  sporting  dogs. 


TERMS  RELATING  TO  DOGS.  291 

Crook-tail. — The  crooked  tail  of  a  Bulldog. 

Cushion. — Fullness  in  the  top  lips. 

Deep  in  Brisket. — Deep  in  chest;  deep  from  withers  to  point  where 
chest  and  brisket  meet. 

Dew-Claws. — Extra  claws,  found  on  the  inside  of  the  lower  portion  of 
the  hind-legs  of  many  dogs. 

Dewlap. — Pendulous  skin  under  the  throat. 

Dish-Faced. — Having  the  nose  higher  at  the  tip  than  at  the  stop.  Some- 
times seen  in  Pointers. 

Dome. — High  in  skull,  showing  an  elevation  between  the  ears. 

Dudley  Nose. — A  flesh-colored  nose. 

Elbow. — The  joint  at  the  top  of  the  forearm. 

Elbows  Out. — Where  the  elbow  joints  turn  perceptibly  out  from  the 
body,  as  in  Bulldogs  or  Dachshunds. 

Expression. — The  expression  of  a  dog  is  largely  but  not  wholly  deter- 
mined by  the  size,  angular  position,  and  degree  of  prominence  of  the  eye. 
For  instance,  in  a  St.  Bernard  the  eye  is  small,  somewhat  sunken,  showing 
a  little  haw.  This  gives  a  dignified  and  rather  benevolent  expression. 
"Collie  expression"  depends  largely  on  the  angle  at  which  eyes  are  set 
to  each  other. 

Faking. — Disguising  a  dog's  coat  or  appearance  by  dyeing,  staining, 
clipping,  or  otherwise  interfering  with  the  dog's  natural  formation. 

Feather. — The  fringe  or  hair  on  the  back  of  the  legs  of  some  breeds, 
notably  Setters,   Spaniels  and   Collies. 

Fiddle-Headed. — A  long,  gaunt,  wolfish  head,  as  seen  in  some  Mastiffs. 

Flag. — The  tail,  with  its  long  hair,  as  seen  in  some  Setters  and  New- 
foundlands. 

Flat-Sided. — Flat  in  ribs;   opposite  of  well-ribbed  up. 

Flews. — The  overhanging  lips  of  the  upper  jaw.  The  term  chiefly  ap- 
plied to  hounds  or  other  deep  mouthed  dogs. 

Forearm. — The  principal  part  of  the  fore-leg,  extending  from  elbow 
to  pastern. 

Frill. — The  fringe  or  hair  on  the  chest  of  dogs,  especially  as  in  the 
Collie. 

Frog-Face  or  Down-Face. — Nose  not  receding. 

Grizzle. — A  bluish-gray  color. 

Hare-foot. — A  long,  narrow  foot,  carried  forward.  The  opposite  of 
Cat-foot. 

Harlequin. — Pied,  mottled,  or  patchy  in  color. 

Haw. — The  red,  inside  eyelid,  as  shown  in  the  Bloodhound  and  St. 
Bernard. 

Height. — The  height  of  a  dog  is  measured  at  the  shoulder.  The  proper 
method  is  to  stand  the  dog  on  level  ground,  close  by  a  wall,  and  to  lay  a 
flat  rule  across  his  shoulders  horizontally  so  as  to  touch  the  wall;  then 
measure  to  the  point  touched  by  the  rule.     Some  people  "tape"  from  the center  between  the  shoulders  to  the  ground,  but  this  plan  obviously  adds 
to  the  real  height  of  the  dog,  and  is  practically  a  fraud. 

Hocks. — The  hock-joints. 

Huckle-bones. — Tops  of  the  hip-joints.     The  space  between  these  and 
the  tops  of  the  shoulders  is  called  the  couplings. 

Kink-Tail. — A  tail  with  a  single  break  or  kink  in  it. 

Knee. — The  joint  attaching  the  fore-pastern  and  forearm. 

Leather. — The   skin.      Especially  applied   to   the  ear. 

Leggy. — Too  long  in  leg  compared  with  tlie  body.     Stilted. 

Lengthy. — Denoting  length  of  body,  as  in  the  Skye  or  St.  Bernard. 

Level. — Applied  to  jaws  and  teeth  where  they  meet  in  front,  and  means 
that  they  meet  evenly. 

Loins. — That  part  of  the  anatomy  of  the  dog  between  the  last  rib  and 
hindquarters. 

Long  in  Flank. — Long  in  back  and  loins. 

Lippy. — Overhanging  lips,  where  such  ought  not  to  exist. 

Lumber. — Superfluous  flesh. 

Mane. — The   feather,   or  long   fine   hair   on   shoulders   of   Collies,   New- 
foundlands and  some  other  breeds. 

Mane. — The  profuse  hair  on  top  of  neck. 

Mask. — The  dark  muzzle  of  a  Mastiff  or   Pug. 

Merle. — A  bluish-gray  color  splashed  with  black. 

Monkey-faced. — See*  Dish-faced. 

Occiput. — The  prominent  bone  at  the  back  or  top  of  the  skull.     Particu- 
larly  prominent   in   Bloodhounds. 

Out  at  Shoulders. — Shoulders  set  on  outside,  as  in  the  Bulldog, 

Out  at  Elbows. — Elbows  turning  out. 

Overshot. — The  upper  teeth  projecting  beyond  the  lower.     This  fault  in 
excess  makes  a  dog  pig-jawed. 

Pad. — The  under  portion  or  sole  of  the  foot. 

Pastern. — The  lowest  section  of  the  leg  below  the  knee  or  hock  junc- 
tion with   foot. 

Peaked. — Dome  of  skull  high,  as  in  Bloodhounds  and  Irish  Setters. 

Penciling. — The   black   marks   or   streaks   divided   by   tan   on   the   toes 
of  a  Black-and-tan  Terrier. 

Pig-Jawed. — The  upper  jaw  longer  than  the  lower. 

Piley. — A   mixture   of  hard   and   soft  hair   in   the   coat,   the   short  coat 
being   woolly. 

Plume. — The  tail  of  a  Pomeranian. 

Prick  Ear. —  (See  Tulip-ear.)     An  erect  ear;  not  turned  down  or  folded. 


TERMS  RELATING  TO  DOGS.  293 

Quality. — The  evidence  of  good  blood  and  breeding,  and  of  desirable 
characteristics  as  shown  in  the  general  appearance  of  the  dog. 

Racy. — Slight  in  build  and  leggy,  as  in  the  Greyhound  or  Whippet. 

Ring-Tailed. — Where  the  tail  at  the  end  curls  into  a  ring. 

Roach  Back  or  Arched  Loins. — The  arched  or  wheel  formation  of  loin, 
as  in  a   Greyhound,   Dachshund,   Dandie  Dinmont  Terrier,  and   Bulldog. 

Rose-Ear.— An  ear  of  which  the  tip  turns  backward  and  downward; 
that  is,  it  folds  at  the  back,  and  the  tip  laps  over  outward,  showing  part  of 
the  inside  of  the  ear. 

Second  Thighs. — The  muscular  development  between  stifle-joint  and 
hock. 

Semi-Prick  Ear. — An   erect   ear   of  which   the  end   falls   over   forward. 

Septum. — The  division  between   the  nostrils. 

Shelly. — Too  narrow  and  light  in  body. 

Short-Coupled. — Short  in  back  and  loins. 

Shoulder. — The  top  of  the  shoulder  blade,  the  point  at  which  the 
height   of  a   dog  is   measured. 

Sickle-Tail. — A   tail   forming   a   semi-circle,   like   a   sickle. 

Skull. — Formed  by  the  frontal,  parietal  and  occipital  bones — the  brain 
box. 

Snipey. — Where  the  muzzle  is  long,  narrow  or  peaked. 

Snipy. — Too  pointed  in  muzzle. 

Splay-Foot. — The  foot  spread  out  flat. 

Stern. — The  region  of  the  tail. 

Stifle. — The   point  next  the  buttock — the  hip   joint. 

Stop.^The  hollow  or  indentation  between  the  skull  and  nasal  bone, 
below  the  <£yes.     This  feature  is  strongly  developed  in  Bulldogs. 

Style. — Showy,  spirited,  or  gay  demeanor. 

Throatiness. — Excess  of  loose  skin  at  the  throat,  dewlap.  In  some 
breeds  this  is  a  fault. 

Thumb  Marks. — The  round,  black  spots  on  the  fore-legs  of  a  Black- 
and-tan   Terrier. 

Tight-Lipped. — Having  no  flew. 

Timber. — Bone. 

Tongue. — -The  voice. 

Top-Knot. — The  hair  on  the  top  of  the  head,  as  in  the  Irish  Water 
Spaniel,   Dandie  Dinmont,  and   Bedlington  Terrier. 

Trace. — The  dark  mark  down  the  back  of  a  Pug. 

Tricolor. — Black,    tan    and    white. 

Tucked-up. — Tucked-up  loin,  as  in  the  Greyhound. 

T^lip   Ea^.-— Partly  pricked,   or    fipright,    and   drooping   at  the   tip. 


294  TERMS  RELATING  TO  DOGS. 

,         Twist. — The  curled  tail  of  a  Pug. 

Undershot. — The  lower  jaw  projecting  beyond  the  upper  one. 

Undershot. — The  lower  incisor  teeth  projecting  beyond  the  upper,  as 
in  Bulldogs.     The  under  jaw  protruding  beyond  the  upper  jaw. 

Upright  Shoulders. — Shoulders  that  are  set  in  an   upright,   instead   of 
an  oblique  position;  not  laid  back. 

"Varmint  Expression. — As  in  the  eye  of  the  Fox  Terrier,  which  is  free 

from  Haw,  is  not  sunken,  is  round  but  rather  small  than  large,  and  set 
horizontally,  not  obliquely,  giving  a  keen,  rather  "cussed"  look. 

Vent. — The  tan-colored  hair  below  root  of  tail. 

Wall-Eye. — A   blue   mottled   eye. 

Weedy. — A  dog  that  is  leggy,  thin,  and  out  of  condition. 

Wheaten. — Pale  yellowish  color. 

Wrinkle. — Loose-folding  skin  over  the  skull. 