


MISCELLANEOUS  205 


AN  ASSORTMENT  OF  CURES 


For  Troubles  a  Dog  May  Have,  That  May  Not  be  Found  Under  Headings 
Elsewhere  of  Regular  Diseases. 


Dogs  Eating  Their  Own  Filth. — I  have  a  fox  terrier  bitch  puppy,  eight 
months  old,  that  has  a  disgusting  habit  of  eating  her  own  droppings,  also 
those  of  other  dogs;  will  pick  them  up  and  drag  them  into  the  kennel.  I 
have  tried  everything  that  I  could  think  of  to  stop  the  practice.  She  is 
large  and  healthy,  but  must  have  some  trouble  with  her  stomach  or  she 
would  not  do  as  she  does.  I  have  six  dogs  and  they  never  offer  to  do  what 
she  appears  to  delight  in.  She  will  make  her  deposit  and  then  turn  around 
and  eat  it  right  after  I  have  got  through  feeding  her.  I  feed  twice  a  day. 
What  can  I  do  to  stop  that  filthy  habit?     Whipping  does  no  good. 

Answer. — Watch  her  closely  and  cover  the  feces  with  powdered  cayenne 
pepper. 

What  can  I  do  for  my  twenty-months-old  greyhound?  About  two 
months  ago  I  noticed  he  would  eat  his  own  and  other  droppings,  Including 
manure;  have  tried  pepper,  and  also  sulphur  and  lard,  but  to  no  purpose. 
Treated  him  with  Dent's  Vermifuge,  but  have  not  noticed  any  worms.  He 
eats  well  and  has  plenty  of  exercise,  but  seems  to  get  thinner  every  day, 
and  lately  will  lie  down  after  a  little  run.     He  has  a  little  matter  In  his  eyes. 

Answer. — «ive  him,  before  meals,  three  times  a  day.  a  pill  containing 
nux  vomica  one-half  grain,  gentian  four  grains,  sulphate  of  iron  three  grains; 
after  meals  give  him  a  grain  of  pure  pepsin. 

Catarrh. — What  can  I  do  for  my  hound?  He  sneezes  about  all  the  time 
and  discharges  at  the  nose.  I  have  tried  several  remedies  without  success. 
He  eats  well  and  is  bright  and  active. 

Answer. — Take  equal  parts  of  distilled  water  and  listerine  and  spray 
into  the  nostrils  twice  daily.      (See  Catarrh.) 

Sore  Mouth. — What  will  cure  my  dogs?  I  have  lost  recently  six  or 
eight  very  fine  dogs.  They  have  very  sore  mouths  and  ropes  of  saliva  run 
from  their  mouths;  they  can  not  eat  anything  or  even  drink  water;  they 
lick  their  fore  feet  all  the  while,  and  finally  die  after  great  suffering. 
Some  people  call  it  slobber  disease,  and  I  have  tried  every  remedy  I  can 
hear  of,  such  as  chlorate  of  potash,  alum,  borax,  sage  tea  and  honey,  none 
of  which   did  any  good. 

Answer. — A  malignant  form  of  sore  mouth.  Take  five  grains  of  per- 
manganate of  potash  to  one  ounce  of  distilled  water  and  wash  the  diseased 
parts  three  times  daily.  Feed  milk  and  raw  eggs.  (See  also  Canker  of  the 
Mouth.) 

Urticaria,  or  Nettle  Rash. — My  pointer  dog,  nine  months  old,  scratches 
and  bites  himself  a  great  deal;  his  ears  are  thick  and  leathery  and  quite 
hot  and  red  inside;  his  eyes  are  red  and  much  matter  and  watery  discharge 
from  them;  he  has  a  very  offensive  smell  about  him  all  the  time;  he  smells 
worse  and  scratches  most  when  in  a  warm  room;  very  small  breakings  out 
come  between  his  forelegs,  which  heal  up  and  disappear  in  a  few  days; 
his  a,ppetite  is  good.  I  feed  him  corn  bread  and  milk,  table  scraps  and  a 
little  cooked  meat.  He  grows  fast  and  is  fat  enough.  I  keep  him  tied 
except  for  an  hour  or  so  each  day.     Please  name  disease  and  prescribe. 

Answer. — Urticaria,  nettle  rash;  stop  feeding  corn  and  substitute 
cooked  turnips,  beats  and  cabbage;  take  oil  of  tar  four  ounces,  alcohol 
four  ounces,  cottonseed  oM  eight  ounces,  mix  and  apply  all  over  the  body 


206  MISCELLANEOUS 

for  six  consecutive  days,  giving  a  bath  on  the  seventh  day;  repeat  treatment 
if  necessary.  For  four  consecutive  mornings  give  one  ounce  of  castor  oil 
and  twenty  drops  of  cascara  segrada. 

Sore  Feet. — What  can  I  do  for  my  beagle  bitch,  two  and  a  half  years 
old,  who  eats  well  and  seems  well,  but  her  feet  get  sore,  sometimes  be- 
tween the  toes  and  sometimes  under  the  toes? 

Answer. — Make  a  strong  decoction  of  white  oak  bark,  and  bathe  the 
feet  with  it  twice  daily. 

Sore  on  Ear. — My  dog  has  a  large  sore  on  the  outside  of  his  ear,  caused 
by  constant  rubbing.  What  would  you  prescribe?  I  have  used  carbolic 
salve,  but  this  seems  to  make  him  want  to  scratch  all  the  more.  I  have 
tied  his  hind  legs  together  but  he  bites  off  the  cord,  and  when  I  put  any- 
thing over  his  head  he  works  it  off. 

Answer. — Cleanse  the  sore  with  warm  water  and  soap,  and  apply  the 
tincture  of  iodine  ounce,  or  use  Spratt's  Locurium,  a  great  healer. 

To  Dry  up  Milk. — My  bitch's  puppies  died  at  birth.  What  shall  I  do? 
Bitch  has  bag  full  of  milk. 

Answer. — Rub  the  bag  with  camphorated  oil,  especially  if  the  teats 
are  hardened.  Another  remedy  is  alcohol,  four  ounces  to  a  quart  of  water. 
Do  not  draw  off  the  milk  now,  as  that  encourages  the  secretion.  (See  also 
Caked  Breast.) 

Sores  on  Hips  and  Hocks. — Setter  has  sores  on  hips  and  hocks;  has 
been  troubled  with  them  some  time. 

Answer. — Apply   boracic   acid    ointment.       (See   also    Sores.) 

Goitre. — I  have  on  my  hands  what  I  suppose  is  a  case  of  goitre;  the 
dog  is  five  months  old,  but  the  protuberance  on  the  throat  is  developing 
very  rapidly.  What  can  I  do  to  remove  it  as  speedily  as  possible  without 
injury? 

"Paint  with  iodine  once  daily  and  give  internally,  if  a  small  dog,  one 
grain,  and  if  a  fair-sized  dog,  two  grains  of  iodide  of  potash  three  times 
daily   for  two  weeks." 

Sore  Feet.-^— My  English  setter  dog,  three  years  old,  feet  get  sore  when 
I  work  him;  they  get  feverish  and  matter  is  discharged  from  between  the 
toes.      What  shall   I  do? 

"Paint  dog's  feet  with  a  solution  of  sulphate  of  copper,  one  dram  to  the 
ounce  of  water." 

Antidote  for  Strychnine  Poisoning. — What  would  be  the  most  effective 
antidote  one  could  carry  while  on  a  hunt  in  case  of  strychnine  poisoning  of 
the  dogs? 

Answer. — Give  an  emetic  if  possible,  then  give  from  twenty  to  thirty 
grains  of  chloral  hydrate,  administered  by  the  rectum;  after  giving  the 
injection,  bring  pressure  on  the  anus  to  prevent  its  expulsion.  (See 
Poisoning.) 

Inflammation  of  the  Lungs. — Please  prescribe  for  my  pointer  bitch,  six 
years  of  age,  which  has  every  symptom  of  inflammation  of  the  lungs.  I  gave 
her  a  large  dose  of  oil,  which  she  threw  up  without  any  action.  After 
taking  her  temperature  (104)  I  gave  her  an  injection  of  soap  suds  and  she 
passed  a  stool  that  was  hard  and  showed  evidence  of  fever.  I  then  gave 
her  two  grains  of  calomel  and  am  now  giving  her  one  drop  of  aconit  every 
hour  to  reduce  the  temperature.  She  breathes  very  hard  and  staggers  and 
runs  sidewise  when  in  motion,  and  saliva  runs  constantly  from  her  mouth. 
Gave  a  feed  of  soft  bread  with  a  few  scraps  of  beef  chopped  into  it. 

Answer. — Give  her  two  grains  of  quinine  every  three  or  four  hours 
and  use  small  doses  of  stimulants,  such  as  a  teaspoonful  of  brandy,  four 
or  five  times  a  day;  keep  up  her  appetite  by  chopped  raw  beef  and  gelatin, 
beef  broths,   etc.      (See  Lungs,  Inflammation   of.) 

Chronic  Constipation. — English  setter,  age  seven  and  one-half  years, 
weight  fifty-two  pounds,  has  been  constipated  for  a  long  time;  it  is  almost 
impossible  for  him  to  make  a  stool;  in  doing  so  he  slides  all  over  the  street 
without  accomplishing  much,  and  when  successful  the  stool  is  very  hard.  I 
have  been  relieving  him  occasionally  by  doses  of  physic.     I  saw  slight  traces 


MISCELLANEOUS  '       207, 

of  blood  in  his  stool  on  November  12.  He  is  a  ravenous  eater  and  hunts 
well  all  day.     Please  prescribe. 

Answer. — Feed  him  largely  on  oatmeal  and  cornmeal;  give  occasional 
doses  of  castor  oil,  and  three  times  a  day  give  fifteen  grains  of  the  hypo- 
sulphite of  soda  and  one-fourth  grain  of  nux  vomica.     (See  Constipation.) 

Chorea. — Diagnose  and  prescribe  for  an  English  setter,  weight  fifty 
pounds,  aged  three  years,  who  had  chorea.  It  is  chronic  and  confined  to 
one  side  of  his  head;  that  is  ,to  the  brain  on  one  side  of  the  center  of  his 
head;  there  is  a  decided  and  noticeable  rise  and  fall  on  the  affected  side 
of  the  skull,  but  nowhere  else  in  his  body.  I  have  tried  mild  remedies,  and 
at  times  have  reduced  the  disease,  but  on  stopping  the  medicine  the  trouble 
would  commence.  Kindly  prescribe  something  powerful  that  will  strike  at 
the  root  of  the  disease. 

Answer. — Give  internally  the  following:  Fluid  extract  of  nux  vomica 
thirty  drops,  fluid  extract  ergot  two  and  one-half  drams,  iodide  of  potash 
one  dram,  water  to  make  two  ounces;  give  a  teaspoonful  twice  a  day  for 
four  days,  then  three  times  a  day  for  two  weeks.     (See  Chorea.) 

Antidote  for  Strychnine. — I  noticed  in  a  recent  issue  the  query.  What 
is  best  to  carry  to  antidote  strychnine  poison,  when  shooting.  I  have 
saved  many  clogs  in  the  field  and  in  different  sections  where  I  have  lived 
by  mother  tincture  belladonna. 

Get  the  green  root  or  mother  tincture  at  any  homeopathic  pharmacy, 
and  if  the  dog  has  had  but  one  spasm,  ten  to  fifteen  drops  poured  down 
his  throat  will  antidote  the  poison;  if  not,  repeat  every  fifteen  minutes. 
When  the  dog  has  had  the  poison  down'  long  enough  to  cause  paralysis, 
and  is  unable  to  swallow,  a  syringe  can  be  used  per  rectum — -twenty  to 
thirty  drops;  and  seldom  does  one  have  to  use  but  two  doses,  either  by 
mouth  or  rectum. 

I  have  saved  dogs  when  given  up  by  veterinary  surgeons,  and  I  believe 
any  dog  can  be  saved  so  long  as  there  is  circulation  enough  to  take  up  the 
antidote.       (See   also    Poisoning.) 

Breaking  Dog  to  Collar  and  Chain. — The  sooner  a  young  dog  is  taught 
to  go  in  a  collar  and  lead  the  better.  It  is  best  to  begin  when  the  puppy 
is  three  or  four  months  old,  first  by  letting  it  wear  a  collar  for  a  week 
or  two,  then  tie  a  piece  of  thick  string  to  the  collar,  and  let  it  go  about 
with  this  for  a  few  days.  At  the  end  of  this  period  substitute  the  string 
for  a  chain,  catching  hold  of  the  chain  with  one  hand  every  now  and  then, 
and  giving  it  a  dainty  bit  with  the  other.  In  this  way  it  will  get  quite 
accustomed  to  what  the  dog,  no  doubt,  thinks  a  strange  method  of  depriving 
it  of  its  sweet  liberty.  Don't  drag  the  dog  along  and  expect  it  to  become 
accustomed  to  the  feel  of  the  collar  by  giving  it  a  sore  and  stiff  neck.  That 
is  the  way  to  make  it  hate  a  collar. 

Crusty  Ears. — "A  dog,  four  years  old,  whose  ears  are  affected  with 
some  sort  of  skin  disease.  The  backs  of  his  ears  seem  dry  and  scurfy, 
the  hair  falls  out  and  the  dog  is  continually  scratching  them.  There  is 
no  swelling,  no  sores,  no  bleeding;  the  skin  seems  simply  drying,  but 
perfectly  healthy  otherwise.      Please  prescribe." 

Answer. — Apply  resinol  ointment  once  daily  after  washing  the  ear. 
Eberhart's  Skin  Remedy  will  cure  this.  Apply  twice  daily.  After  putting 
a  little  of  it  on  the  ear,  rub  and  work  it  well  with  thumb  and  finger  till 
the  scurvy  matter  softens  and  you  remove  it  from  the  ear  by  rubbing. 
Continue  daily  treatment  till  cured — a  matter  of  a  week  or  so  as  a  rule. 

Carbolized  Vaseline  (How  to  Make). — Carbolized  vaseline  is  an  oint- 
ment often  recommended  by  the  veterinary  profession,  and  is  often  inquired 
for  by  dog  fanciers.  A  good  plan  for  making  it  is  as  follows:  Take  six 
ounces  of  solid  paraphine  wax,  melt  it  thoroughly  in  a  saucepan,  and  when 
.melted  add  twelve  ounces  of  vaseline  and  remelt.  Then  as  it  cools  add 
about  one  dram  of  pure  carbolic  acid,  and  stir  thoroughly  until  cold. 

This  is  the  official,  or  British  Pharmacopaeia,  formula.  It  involves  very 
little  trouble,  and  makes  the  most  elegant  and  serviceable  preparation.  A 
very  fair  ointment  can  be  made  by  simply  rubbing  pure  carbolic  acid  into 


208  MISCELLANEOUS 

petroleum  jelly,  say  three  or  four  drops  to  each  ounce,  but  it  is  very  soft, 
especially  in  hot  weather,  and  does  not  keep  nearly  so  well  as  the  first. 

Terrier  Continually  Scratching. — Terrier  is  repeatedly  scratching  him- 
self. He  has  no  fleas  or  anything  about  his  body,  is  very  often  washed,  so 
cannot  be  dirty.  It  is  very  annoying.  He  will  roll  over  on  his  back,  and 
then  try  and  scratch  himself  anywhere  and  everywhere  about  his  body. 
What  shall  I  do  with  him? 

Answer. — Give  the  dog  every  week  during  the  hot  weather  a  bath  in 
Standard  Disinfectant,  diluted  with  fifty  parts  of  water. 

Muzzles. The  season  for  muzzles,  just  when  the  dog  requires  a  free 

mouth  more  than  ever,  will  come  around.  No  comfortable  muzzle  has  yet 
been  invented — nor  is  it  likely  to  be,  since  every  self-respecting  dog  has 
personal  objections  to  being  constantly  faced  by  a  cage  arrangement,  and 
will  show  his  distaste  by  rubbing  on  the  ground  and  pawing,  with  the  result 
that  he  very  soon  will  make  raw  and  sore  places.  The  buckle  of  the  strap 
used  to  fasten  the  muzzle  needs  to  be  carefully  arranged  and  padded  to 
prevent  this.  Even  though  this  and  every  other  care  be  taken,  in  many  cases 
the  trouble  results,  and  every  owner  of  good  dogs  knows  how  difficult  it  is 
when  once  the  hair  has  been  destroyed  to  bring  up  appearances  again  to 
their  original  excellence. 

Tonic  Pill  for  Dog  After  a  Show. — Here  is  a  good  recipe  for  dogs  when 
returning  from  a  show  or  after  any  specially  hard  work.  It  makes  an 
excellent  pill  for  appetite,  and  being  a  mild  laxative,  is  just  what  a  dog 
ought  to  have  when  he  comes  home.     Take  of: 

Compound  powder  of  colocynth 24  grains 

Sulphate-  of  iron    12   grains 

Sulphate  of  quinine 12   grains 

Powdered    liquorice   root    48   grains 

Extract  of  gentian,  sufficient  to  make  into  a  suitable  mass.  Divide  into  16 
pills  (or  32  of  half  size  if  desired),  Give  one  of  the  larger  size  to  a 
dog  of  not  more  than  20  lbs.  every  four  or  five  hours  until  a  distinctly 
aperient  effect  is  produced.  The  smaller  pills  will  answer  for  smaller  dogs, 
and  large  dogs  can  have  two  or  three  of  the  pills,  according  to  circumstances. 
These  pills  are  best  prepared  fresh  as  required.  I  prefer,  however,  to  use 
Sergeant's,  Clayton's  or  Dent's  Condition  Pills  much  handier.  Gelatin  or 
sugar  coated,  and  easier  to  give. 

Chronic  Cough. — "Pointed  dog  whose  coat  was  good,  healthy  in  every 
way,  bowels  regular,  has  acted  dull  for  two  weeks,  wanting  to  lie  down  a 
good  bit  of  the  time.  Taken  for  a  run  after  a  wheel  unless  I  rode  slowly, 
will  begin  to  cough  after  a  couple  miles,  and  unless  given  a  rest  would 
cough  as  if  he  would  strangle  to  death.  It  is  a  dry  cough,  and  I  have  never 
seen  Mm  emit  anything.  He  seldom  coughs  when  at  home.  I  treated  for 
worms  and  got  none,  gave  cough  medicine  and  it  done  no  good." 

Answer. — It  is  a  chronic  cough  and  hard  to  cure.  Get  the  "Cough 
Pill"  prescription  filled  as  given  in  this  book,  and  give  a  pill  night  and 
morning,  keeping  them  up  regularly  for  some  weeks.     (See  Cough.) 

Weak  Joints. — "Basset-hound  pup,  eleven  months  old,  very  weak  in 
joints  below  pastern,  which  makes  him  weak  as  if  he  had  tender  fore  feet. 
He  does  not  knuckle  over.  I  have  commenced  giving  him  Parrish's  Chemi- 
cal Food.     Can  I  do  better?     He  has  no  worms."  % 

Answer. — Continue  the  Parrish's  food,  and  bathe  the  legs  twice  daily 
with  a  solution  of  Tidman's  sea  salt.     Feed  principally  on  raw  meat. 

Cold  and  Debility. — "Prescribe  for  my  English  setter.  She  had  a 
litter  of  five  puppies,  then  one  eye  got  sore  and  a  film  came  over  it;  she 
lost  her  appetite  and  her  milk  dried  up  in  two  weeks.  I  have  been  feeding 
the  puppies  on  cow's  milk  ever  since.  She  eats  barely  enough  to  keep  her 
alive.  She  does  not  run  at  the  nose  or  the  other  eye,  or  cough.  What  is 
th«  matter  with  her? 


MISCELLANEOUS  109 

Answar. — Cold  and  debility.  Give  her  a  tablespoonful  of  the  emulsion 
of  Cod  Liver  Oil  three  times  a  day,  feed  raw,  lean  beel,  chopped  fine,  milk 
and  eggs,  gelatin  or  anything  she  will  eat,  and  give  five  grains  of  pepsin 
after  meals.     Use  my  eye  lotion  No.  2  twice  a  day." 

Fits. — "My  setter,  three  years  old,  is  subject  to  fits.  Will  hunt  fast 
for  three  or  four  hours,  then  get  so  weak  he  staggers  and  finally  lies  down, 
unable  to  get  up  and  limber  as  a  rag;  the  spell  will  last  an  hour.  Previous 
to  these  spells  he  is  going  fast  and  seems  strong.  Never  whines  or  makes 
any  noise  while  he  has  a  fit.     Is  in  good  condition." 

Answer. — "Give  2  grains  of  iodide  of  potash  three  times  daily  for  two 
weeks,  together  with  one-sixtieth  of  a  grain  of  strychnine."     See  also  Fits.) 

Bloody  Mucus. — "Please  prescribe  for  my  setter  dog,  three  years  old, 
whose  bowels  are  loose,  and  he  is  constantly  straining  and  passing  a  bloody 
mucus  which  is  becoming  quite  offensive;  his  appetite  is  fairly  good;  hair 
in  tolerable  condition;  he  is  lively  enough  and  hunts  quite  fast  and  keeps 
going.     I  notice  he  is  losing  flesh.     Is  his  condition  serious?" 

Answer. — "Yes,  it  is  serious.  Give  one  ounce  of  castor-oil,  and  three 
times  daily  give  one  teaspoon ful  of  the  following  mixture:  Fluid  extract' 
gentian  root  one  dram,  fluid  extract  hydrastis  one  dram,  tincture  of  ginger 
one-half  dram;  water  to  make  two  ounces." 

Bitch  With  Pups  Won't  Eat. — "English  setter  bitch,  weight  thirty-eight 
pounds,  who  has  a  litter  of  ten  puppies,  four  weeks  old.  She  does  not  eat 
as  she  should;  every  few  days  she  will  refuse  food  and  vomit  freely,  and 
the  only  thing  I  can  get  her  to  eat  is  bread  and  milk.  Her  bowels  are  very 
loose.  Puppies  are  in  good  condition.  I  have  been  giving  them  bread  and 
milk  also." 

Answer. — "Wean  the  puppies  as  soon  as  possible,  feed  the  dam  lean  raw 
beef,  chopped  fine,  if  she  will  eat  it.  Give  her  three  grains  of  pepsin  after 
each  meal,  also  give  a  tablespoonful  of  cod  liver  oil  emulsion  four  times  a 
day." 

Urinating  Too  Often. — "My  pointer  bitch,  three  years  old,  that  has  just 
had  a  litter  of  puppies,  which  I  destroyed  as  soon  as  they  were  born.  She 
tries  to  make  water  too  often,  at  least  twenty-five  times  in  an  hour.  I  had 
her  out  on  Monday,  September  5,  and  she  tried  to  make  water  during  the 
day  at  least  five  hundred  times.     What  is  the  matter?     Please  prescribe." 

Answer. — "Give  your  bitch  a  teaspoonful  of  sanmetto  three  times  a  day 
for  at  least  two  weeks,  and  if  necessary  longer;  she  is  suffering  from  in- 
flammatory action  of  the  uniary  organs." 

Sore  Throat  Cough  Due  to  Cold. — "I  have  a  hound  with  a  peculiar  af- 
fection of  the  throat.  He  has  a  hoarseness  of  the  voice,  with  a  slight 
watery  discharge  from  the  eyes,  also  a  saliva  from  the  corners  of  the  mouth. 
Thinking  he  had  a  cold  I  gave  him  a  Cough  Cure,  but  it  did  not  touch  him. 
Although  his  eyes  and  mouth  are  now  free  from  discharge  his  voice  is  very 
hoarse,  acting  a  great  deal  like  a  man  with  a  sore  throat,  requiring  an  effort 
to  speak.  Do  you  think  there  is  a  bone  splinter  in  the  throat  or  is  it  from 
a  cold?     Please  prescribe." 

Answer. — "We  think  it  is  a  cold,  use  the  following  mixture:  Muriate 
ammonia  six  drams,  fluid  extract  belladonna  three  drams,  fluid  extract  licorice 
four  ounces,  simple  syrup  four  ounces;  give  a  teaspoonful  every  five  hours." 

Lumps  and  Sores  on  Dog. — "I  have  a  pointer  pappy  about  seven  months 
old,  and  when  he  was  three  months  old  a  lump  formed  on  the  top  of  his 
head;  I  had  him  treated  by  a  veterinary  who  blistered  it  and  opened  it, 
removing  some  pus.  The  head  soon  got  well,  but  a  month  or  so  later  he 
took  the  distemper,  which  soon  yielded  to  treatment,  and  he  was  growing 
and  looking  finely,  but  recently  a  large  lump  formed  on  his  left  side  and 
three  days  later  a  larger  one  on  the  left  side  of  his  neck.  I  used  blisters 
on  both  and  they  are  now  discharging  pus.  The  puppy  has  always  been  fed 
liberally  on  well  cooked  meat,  with  plenty  of  bread  and  milk,  and  kept  in 
the  best  of  kenaels.  Please  prescribe.  I  have  two  more  of  the  same  litter 
that  went  through  the  distemper  all  right  and  show  no  signs  of  any  other 
disorder." 

Answer.-^"Wash  out  the  sores  that  are  discharging  pus  once  a  day  for 


210  ,  MISCELLANEOUS 

one  week  with  equal  parts  of  peroxide  of  hydrogen  and  water,  and  give,  twice 
a  day,  Sergeant's  Condition  Pills." 

Lameness  From  Hard  Bunch  on  Leg. — "Please  prescribe  for  my  Eng- 
lish setter  dog,  six  years  old.  He  has  had  a  hard  bunch  in  the  middle 
joint  of  his  right  hindleg  for  some  time;  he  always  chews  at  it  as  if  it 
itched,  and  it  is  making  him  lame;  he  had  the  same,  on  each  of  his  two  fore- 
legs, but  they  went  away  at  length  without  treatment." 

Answer. — Give  ten  grains  of  the  idodide  of  potash  three  times  a  day 
for  two  weeks,  followed  by  a  Sergeant's  Condition  Pill  twice  a  day  for 
probably  a  month.  Paint  the  enlargement  with  tincture  of  iodine  once 
daily  for  a  week. 

Constant  and  Frequent  Urinating. — "An  English  setter  bitch,  who  eats 
well,  has  a  good  coat,  is  full  of  life  and  seems  to  be  in  perfect  health,  yet 
when  she  is  lying  in  one  place  or  sleeping  there  is  a  constant  but  slow 
discharge  of  urine,  and  when  she  gets  up  her  whole  side  will  be  wet.  I 
notice  also  a  matter-like  secretion.  I  have  noticed  these  discharges  the 
past  week  and  cannot  understand  whether  it  is  a  weakness  of  the  kidneys 
or  a  disease.     What  is  the  trouble?     Please  prescribe." 

Answer. — "Give  one  dram  of  sanmetto  three  times  a  day  for  a  couple  of 
weeks." 

Bloodshot  Eyes. — "My  English  setter  bitch,  three  years  old,  had  dis- 
temper badly  at  one  year.  Since  then  her  eyes  and  the  lining  of  eyelids 
have  been  red,  at  times  worse  than  others;  there  seems  to  be  no  inflam- 
mation, only  the  white  of  the  eyes  and  lids  are  bloodshot,  particularly  so 
after  a  hard  hunt  or  when  she  is  a  bit  off;  they  very  rarely  discharge. 
Please  prescribe." 

Answer. — "Drop  in  the  eyes  three  times  a  day  Eberhart's  Eye  Lotion 
No.  2." 

Dandruff  and  Hair  Coming  Out. — "Please  prescribe  for  cocker  spaniel, 
six  months  old,  that  has  dry  dandruff  all  over  him,  hot,  dry  nose  and 
scratches  continually.  Have  used  mange  cure  a  number  of  times  and 
washed  with  dog  soap,  but  these  have  done  little  good.  The  hair  is  coming 
out  where  the  dandruff  is  worse." 

Answer. — "Take  boraic  acid  one  ounce,  saliclyic  acid  one  ounce,  glycer- 
ine one  pint;  rub  this  well  into  the  skin  twice  a  day  and  wash  every  third 
day  with  Eberhart's  Dog  Soap;  continue  this  treatment  for  thirty  clays. 
Internally  give  five  grains  of  the  hyposulphite  of  soda  and  three  grains  of 
pepsin  three  times  a  day.  In  lieu  of  prescription  given  for  external  treat- 
ment better  use  Eberhart's  Skin  Cure,  preceded  by  bath  with  his  dog  soap." 

Swelling  on  Legs  Above  the  Hock  and  Discharge. — "My  pointer,  eight 
and  one-half  months  old,  that  has  distemper  and  with  it  came  a  large  swell- 
ing right  above  the  hock  on  both  hind-legs,  and  one  on  the  righ  shoulder 
along  the  neck;  all  three  of  these  opened  with  a  discharge  which  has 
caused  a  soreness  all  over  the  neck  and  at  the  right  ear;  all  of  the  hair 
is  coming  out,  and  there  is  still  a  little  discharge.  The  two  lumps  on  the 
hind-legs  opened  on  November  15;  the  one  on  the  shoulder  opened-  on  No- 
vember 19.  The  fever  is  broken  and  the  puppy  eats  well.  The  openings 
on  the  legs  are  closing  up  but  are  a  little  thick  yet  and  are  very  white. 
The  neck  where  the  pus  has  been  discharged  upon  it  is  very  red,  on  thfl 
order  of  a  scalded  spot,  and  the  hair  is  all  off." 

Answer. — "Give  three  grains  of  the  iodide  of  potash  three  times  a  day 
for  two  weeks,  wash  out  the  sores  with  equal  parts  of  the  peroxide  of 
hydrogen  and  water  for  two  or  three  days,  then  stop  the  washing;  then  put 
the  dog  on  a  thirty  days'  treatment  of  Sergeant's  or  Clayton's  Condition 
Pills,  one  pill  night  and  morning." 

Lameness  in  Stifle  Joint. — "My  pointer  dog,  eighteen  months  old,  be- 
came lame  in  his  right  fore-leg  about  seven  or  eight  months  ago,  and  I  am 
unable  to  ascertain  where  the  lameness  is.  I  can  find  nothing  in  the  foot 
or  any  indication  of  soreness  in  the  leg  or  shoulder;  where  he  steps  on  that 
foot  he  places  it  out  beyond  a  natural  position,  and  walks  with  his  leg 
projected.  He  is  in  good  health;  had  the  distemper  when  four  months 
old.     What  is  the  ailment?     Please  prescribe." 


MISCELLANEOUS  211 

Answer. — "The  lameness  is  located  in  the  stifle  joint.  Add  one  ounce 
of  the  tincture  of  arnica  to  a  pint  of  witch  hazel,  and  apply  two  or  three 
times  a  day  with  gentle  friction  and  hand  rubbing,  fifteen  minutes  at  a 
time." 

Mumps  or  Parotitis.- — "I  have  a  dog  that  has  a  swelling  on  each  side  of 
his  head,  below  ears,  that  comes  on  suddenly.  The  dog  is  very  droopy,  and 
carries  his  head  stiff,  and  does  not  eat  very  much.  What  can  be  done  for 
him?" 

Answer. — "From  the  symptoms  shown  above  your  dog  has  parotitis 
or  mumps,  which  is  an  affection  of  the  parotid  glands,  and  in  this  case  both 
of  the  glands  are  affected.  When  the  disease  first  makes  its  appearance 
warm  applications  to  the  swellings  are  indicated,  in  the  form  of  warm 
water  or  poultices,  and  on  account  of  the  difficulty  in  keeping  poultices 
on  from  the  dog  shaking  head,  etc.,  stimulating  liniments  might  be  used, 
such  as  soap  liniment,  which  should  be  applied  twice  daily,  or  use  yellow' 
oxide  of  mercury  ointment,  well  rubbed  into  the  skin  over  the  enlargement. 
Should  the  swelling  show  no  tendency  to  become  smaller  in  a  few  days  it 
would  indicate  the  formation  of  an  abscess  in  the  gland,  which  should  be 
carefully  opened  and  treated  with  some  antiseptic  injection,  as  creolin  3 
per  cent  in  water.  The  appetite  will  return  after-  the  swelling  and  acute 
stage  of  the  disease  has  passed  off." 

Dog  Slobbering. — "I  would  like  to  ask  the  cause  of  a  dog's  slobbering. 
He  has  no  appetite." 

Answer. — "Examine  the  mouth  for  foreign  bodies  and  the  teeth  par- 
ticularly for  decay.  If  either  condition  exists  prompt  attention  is  indicated. 
Wash  out  the  mouth  with  the  following  solution:  Permanganate  of  potasb 
one  part;  alum  three  parts,  chlorate  of  potash  five  parts,  water  one  hun- 
dred parts.     Use  freely  four  or  five  times  a  day." 

Rheumatic  Condition. — "My  pointer,  three  weeks  old,  and  naturally  fat, 
since  she  has  had  a  litter  of  puppies,  has  been  lame  in  one  hind-leg,  favoring 
it  as  she  travels.  The  leg  seems  thinner  than  the  opposite  one  and  re- 
cently she  travels  on  said  leg  and  favors  one  of  the  front  legs,  running  on 
three.  I  think  it  must  be  internal  as  she  has  not  been  hurt.  I  have  tried 
liniment   but   to   no   avail." 

Answer. — "She  is  rheumatic.  Give  her  a  teaspoonful  of  Fellows'  Syrup 
of  Hypophosphites  three  times  a  day  for  six  weeks,  give  five  grains  of  salol 
twice  a  clay  for  two  weeks,  feed  her  anything  she  will  eat,  do  not  over- 
exercise  or  expose  to  cold  or  dampness,  and  hand  rub  the  limb  twenty  min- 
utes at  a  time  three  times  a  day." 

Sore  Feet  in  Hunting  Dogs. — During  hunting  season,  when  dogs  are 
run  on  rough  hard  ground,  the  feet  may  become  sore,  sometimes  in  the 
pads,  sometimes  between  the  toes,  or  both.  A  solution  of  sulphate  of  cop- 
per, one  dram  to  an  ounce  of  water,  is  good  for  the  sores  between  the  toes, 
and  a  strong  solution  of  white  oak  bark  is  another  remedy,  especially  for 
the  sore  pads. 

Sucking  Eggs,  To  Break  Dogs  of. — Make  a  small  hole  in  each  end  of 
an  egg  and  blow  out  the  contents.  Then  fill  the  shell  with  a  mixture  of 
strong  mustard  and  red  pepper,  paste  pieces  of  white  paper  over  the  holes 
and  allow  the  dog  to  find  and  eat  the  egg.  Very  few  experiences  with  such 
eggs  will  be  needed  to  cure  his  propensity. 

Debility  and  Weakness  After  Distemper. — "Have  cured  my  eight- 
months-old  setter  bitch  of  the  distemper,  but  since  she  has  been  cured  she 
can  hardly  stand.  Her  eyes,  nose  and  mouth  seem  to  be  in  good  condition, 
yet  she  eats  and  drinks  little.  When  sleeping  she  whines  and  shakes  her- 
self unceasingly;  her  bowels  act  the  same  as  if  she  had  the  diarrhea,  and 
she  has  acted  this  way  for  six  or  eight  weeks.  The  warts  have  disappeared. 
Please  prescribe." 

Answer. — "Feed  anything  she  will  eat — beef  broths,  chopped  lean  beef, 
gelatin  and  eggs,  etc. — and  give  her  a  Sergeant's,  Clayton's  or  Eberhart's 
Condition   Pill  twice  a  day  for  probably  a  month." 

No  Name  for  This  Disease. — "My  pointer  dog  is  ten  years  old,  hunts 
and  covers  the  ground  in  good  style,  will  take  a  six-rail  fence  with  ease,  will 


212  |        |      \         |      I     '  MISCELLANEOUS 

hunt  all  day,  and  cry  to  proceed  when  I  sit  down  to  lunch  or  to  rest;  he 
does  not  suffer  any  pain  afield,  only  he  swells  about  the  loins  the  next 
morning  and  is  sore  to  the  touch  on  the  sides  of  the  small  of  his  back. 
He  is  continually  trying  to  pass  his  Water  when  afield,  but  only  a  few  drops 
of  blood  will  pass,  and  in  these  attempts  his  back  parts  quiver  a  great  deal. 
Please  name  the  disease  and  prescribe  a  cure." 

Answer. — "Give  a  teaspoonful  of  sanmetto  three  times  a  day.  There 
is  no  particular  name  for  this  trouble  in  dogs.  Also  give  him  for  some 
time  one  of  the  Condition  Pills  mentioned  above." 

Epilepsy. — "Prescribe  for  my  three-year-old  sixty-pound  foxhound,  that, 
at  times,  while  on  chase,  will  suddenly  fall,  his  legs  become  stiff  and  he 
will  whine  as  though  in  great  pain  and  tremble  all  over.  The  attacks  do 
not  last  long,  however,  and  he  is  all  right  again,  or  seems  to  be.  Nothing 
else   (so  far  as  I  can  see)   appears  to  trouble  him..    What  is  the  matter?" 

Answer.— "A  mild  form  of  epilepsy.  Give  him  a  capsule  three  times 
a  day  containing  pepsin  three  grains,  gentian  two  grains,  nux  vomica  one- 
half  grain." 

Drying  Up  Bag  on  Bitch. — "I  have  a  pointer  bitch,  two  and  a  half  years 
old,  which  has  already  had  puppies.  She  came  in  season  again  about  the 
middle  of  January  and  I  had  her  bred;  she  has  not  had  any  puppies,  but  her 
teats  came  down  a  little  and  she  has  a  little  milk  in  them.  Should  I  rub 
them  with  anything  to  dry  them  up?     If  so,  please  prescribe." 

Answer. — "Apply  the  following,  with  gentle  friction,  twice  a  flay: 
Lanolin  one  ounce,  camphor  twenty  grains,  belladonna  twenty  grains." 

Tendency  to  Rickets  in  Puppies. — "My  English  setter  puppies,  two 
months  old,  tremble  when  they  stand  up  and  suddenly  will  fall,  then  when 
they  get  up  act  as  if  sore  on  their  fore-legs;  at  times  they  seem  better. 
I  feed  them  milk  and  soft  food  such  as  bread  and  gravy  mixed.  What  is 
the  matter?      Please  prescribe." 

Answer. — "A  tendency  to  rickets.  Feed  raw,  lean  beef,  chopped  fine, 
raw  eggs,  gelatin,  meat  broths,  stale  bread,  etc.,  and  give  each  puppy  one- 
half  teaspoonful  of  cod  liver  oil  emulsion  four  times  a  day." 

Running  Sore  on  Leg. — "On  the  fleshy  part  of  my  pointer's  hind-leg 
is  a  running  sore,  in  size  about  two  inches  by  one  inch,  and  at  the  top  of 
the  sore  is  a  light-colored  fluid.     Please  prescribe." 

Answer. — "Inject  equal  parts  of  peroxide  of  hydrogen  and  water  three 
times  a  day  for  three  days;  then  discontinue  and  sponge  the  sore  three 
times  a  day  with  a  solution  of  sulphate  of  copper,  one  dram,  water  one 
ounce." 

Kennel  Sores  or  Callous  Growths. — Dogs  are  sometimes  afflicted  with 
kennel  sores  on  hips  and  hocks,  elbows,  etc.  They  should  be  attended 
to  at  once.  Boracic  acid  ointment  should  be  applied.  Callous  growths  on 
elbows  and  joints  must  be  kept  softened  with  vaseline  or  whale  oil. 

Fungus  Growths  on  Mouth  or  Tongue. — "My  cocker  spaniel  has  been 
troubled  lately  with  canker  in  the  mouth  and  on  the  tongue.  This  comes 
in  spots,  which  enlarge  until  the  several  spots  join  together;  it  looks  like 
a  fungus  growth,  not  a  sore,  but  on  the  mushroom  order.     Please  prescribe." 

Answer. — "Touch  the  spots  once  daily,  for  four  days,  with  lunar  caustic; 
care  being  taken  not  to  allow  any  to  run  on  his  tongue,  and  only  one  to  be 
treated  at  a  time." 

Fever  Mixture.— Every  kennel  man  should  keep  a  good  fever  mixture 
on  his  kennel  shelf.  A  chill  or  cold  is  indicated  by  hot,  dry  nose,  shivering 
and  lassitude,  dull  eyes,  with  more  or  less  discharge  from  nose  and  eyes. 
If  attended  to  at  once  serious  complications  may  often  be  avoided.  Dogs 
going  to  and  from  shows  are  subjected  to  many  extreme  changes  of  temper- 
ature during  express  transportation,  and  a  quinine  pill  will  usually  ward  off 
any  ill  effects.  If,  however,  the  symptoms  described  develop,  the  following 
fever  mixture  should  be  given:  Powdered  nitre  one  dram,  sweet  spirits  of 
nitre  one-half  ounce,  Mindereruos'  spirits  one-half  ounce,  wine  of  antimony 
one  dram,  water  four  ounces.  Terriers  and  dogs  over  15  pounds  up  to" 
pointers  and  setters  should  be  given  a  tablespoonful  m  a  mtlf  gruel  every 
four  hours. 


MISCELLANEOUS  I  '  21  % 

Bone  Swallowed.— If  a  dog  has  swallowed  a  small  bone,  a  chicken 
splinter,  for  instance  ,and  shows  signs  of  trouble,  it  is  a  good  plan  to  give  a 
bolus  of  mashed  potato  or  soft  crumb  bread.  This  will  generally  aid  the 
passage  of  the  bone. 

*Age  to  Spay  Bitches. — "At  what  age  is  it  best  to  spay  a  bitch?  Can 
a  person  perform  the  operation  himself?  If  so,  shall  be  thankful  for  the 
information  on  how  to  proceed?" 

Answer. — "The  operation  of  spaying  a  bitch  is  usually  undertaken  at 
the  age  of  four  to  six  months.  I  do  not  advise  such  an  interference  with 
Nature,  however.  Upon  maturity  the  spayed  bitch  or  castrated  dog  becomes 
unduly  fat  and  lazy,  and  lacks  enthusiasm,  ambition  and  sagacity.  Most 
assuredly  such  an  operation  must  be  attended  to  by  a  competent  veterinrian. 
Clipping  Overgrown  Toe  Nails. — Toy  dogs  that  have  little  or  no  exercise 
out  of  doors  and  do  not  get  a  chance  to  get  their  nails  wore  down  by  con- 
tact with  the  street  are  often  troubled  with  this,  and  neglected  cases  where 
the  nails  curl  around  and  grow  into  the  flesh  are  very  painful,  fester, 
causing  soreness  and  lameness.  Cut  off  the  ends  of  the  nails  with  a  pair 
of  sharp  nippers,  that  you  can  buy  at  any  hardware  store — but  not  too 
close.  Do  this  same  as  you  do  your  finger  nails,  but  with  your  dog  do  it 
about  every  two  weeks,  avoiding  cutting  into  the  quick  part,  you  can  easily 
do  this  right. by  being  careful. 

Dogs  Killing  Chickens. — Should  your  dog  acquire  this  very  bad  habit 
you  can  break  him  of  it,  which  you  should  do  at  once,  as  he  has  no  right  to 
do  this,  and  perhaps  cause  trouble  with  you  and  your  neighbors.  Catch 
him  in  the  act,  give  him  a  good  whipping  and  then  take  the  chicken  he 
has  killed  and  fasten  it  securely  around  his  neck  so  he  can't  scratch  it  off, 
and  make  him  wear  this  chicken  for  a  necklace  for  a  week,  or  until  the 
chicken  has  become  so  decayed  that  the  odor  will  cause  him  such  an  intense 
dislike  for  fowl  that  anything  else  would  smell  more  sweet.  This  is  an 
infallible  cure  if  you  can  fasten  chicken  on  so  securely  that  he  can't 
get  rid  of  it. 

Rheumatism. — Terrier  dog,  about  four  years,  has  gradually  developed 
great  weakness  in  the  hind-quarters.  He  shakes  when  he  is  standing  and 
can  only  just  manage  to  get  on  to  a  low  chair,  dragging  the  back  legs  up 
behind  him.  His  appetite  is  good  and  he  is  in  good  condition,  and  his 
bowels  are  all  right.  He  can  run  quite  well,  but  walks  rather  stiffly.  He 
sleeps  a  good  deal.     Rather  small,  weight  about  20  lbs. 

Answer. — In  all  probability  this  weakness  is  due  to  rheumatism,  and 
I  advise  you  to  first  give  some  medicine  for  this,  say,  a  five  grain  tabloid 
of  aspirin  three  times  a  day  after  food.  This  may  be  continued  for  four 
or  five  days  or  even  a  week,  then  afterwards  give  a  nerve  stimulant  if  the 
dog  is  still  weak  in  the  legs,  as  two  drops  of  tincture  of  nux  vomica  in  a 
dessertspoonful  of  water  three  times  a  day  after  food.  Keep  the  bowels 
open,  and  avoid  meat  for  a  time.     See  Rheumatism). 

Sore  Feet  in  Hunting  Dogs. — Dogs  that  travel  much  on  hard,  dry  roads, 
as  Dalmatians  often  do,  and  sporting  dogs  hunting  over  rough  ground,  short 
stubble,  or  stumpy  heather,  are  apt  to  get  the  spongy,  elastic  pads  of  the 
feet  contused  and  worn  thin.  The  treatment  depends  on  the  extent  of 
the   injury. 

If  the  case  is  severe,  first  apply  a  poultice  of  half  bran  and  half  boiled 
turnips.  Sometimes  the  inflammation  is  great,  and  the  feet  become  swol- 
len, hot,  and  painful,  so  that  the  dog  cannot  stand,  and  the  general  health 
suffers.  Feverishness  and  loss  of  appetite  reduce  his  strength,  matter  forms 
in  the  feet,  or  the  soles  slough  off.  In  such  cases  linseed  meal  should  be 
added  to  the  other  ingredients  of  the  poultice,  and  a  little  olive  oil  poured 
over  its  surface.  The  dog  should  have  a  mild  aperient,  a  dose  of  fever 
mixture  three  or  four  times  a  day,  and  be  kept  on  a  light  diet.  It  may  be 
necessary,  for  the  more  speedy  relief  of  the  dog,  to  let  the  matter  out  with 
the  lanset,  and  in  all  respects  these  cases  should  be  treated  as  ulcers.  Dogs 
long  confined  should  not  be  at  once  run  much  on  hard  roads  or  worked 
on  rough  ground,  but  their  feet  gradually  hardened  by  daily  increased 
exercise. 


214  MISCELLANEOUS 

Hints  on  Docking.— This  operation  should  be  performed  when  the  puppy 
is  from  3  to  5  days  old,  if  healthy  and  strong.  Weaklings  it  is  advisable 
not  to  dock  before  10  days  old.  A  pair  of  sharp  scissors  will  be  needed. 
Before  severing  the  tail  the  skin  should  be  well  drawn  back  towards  the 
body,  so  that  after  the  tail  is  cut,  the  skin  overlaps  the  severed  bone.  The 
bleeding  as  a  rule  stops  very  soon.  In  case  it  does  not  stop,  some  Frair's 
Balsam  should  be  applied  at  once. 

The  following  lengths  are  advisable.  Spaniels,  Irish  Terriers  and 
Airedales  have  rather  more  than  half  the  tail  removed.  Fox  Terriers, 
about  two-fifths.  Griffons,  about  a  third  of  the  tail  is  left.  Schipperkes  are 
docked  quite  close  to  the  rump,  or  a  joint  nearer  the  back,  but  it  is  advis- 
able that  this  operation  should  be  done  by  a  veterinarian. 

Alum  Water,  to  Make. — One  ounce  pulverized  alum  to  a  quart  of  water. 
Lump  on  Neck. — Litter  of  bull  pups  2  months  old;   one  of  them  has  a 
large  lump,,  about  as  big  as  a  large  walnut,  under  the  under  jaw. 

Answer. — The  swelling  is  probably  an  enlarged  gland;  cut  the  hair  off 
over  the  swelling  to  the  extent  of  a  quarter,  and  paint  with  tincture  of  iodine 
twice  a  week. 

Bones,  Use  and  Abuse  of. — If  administered  in  an  intelligent  spirit,  bones 
are  not  only  much  appreciated,  but  extremely  beneficial  to  dogs.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  wrong  sort  of  bones  are  liable  to  cause  them  much  trouble. 
A  large  bone,  with  not  too  much  meat  upon  it,  if  given  to  a  dog  to  gnaw, 
will  keep  him  amused  for  hours,  and  it  will  also  assist  in  keeping  his  teeth 
in  order  and  benefit  his  digestion,  as  the  gnawing  will  increase  the  secre- 
tion of  saliva.  A  small,  hard  bone,  such  as  that  of  a  rabbit,  or  chicken,  or 
lamb  chop,  may,  if  swallowed,  cause  severe  inflammation  of  the  intestines, 
or  a  sharp  point  of  the  bone  may  wound  the  dog's  inside  and  so  cost  him 
his  life.  Of  course,  the  danger  of  either  of  these  occurrences  is  more  or  less 
remote,  but  it  exists  all- the  same,  and  therefore  the  wise  dog  owner  will 
run  no  risk. 

The  feet  of  chicken  bones  are  safe,  so  is  the  neck,  and  are  a  dainty 
bite   for   the   dog. 

Anthritis  (or  inflammation  of  a  joint). — The  joint  usually  is  swollen 
nad  very  painful  and  the  victim  is  lame  and  unable  to  place  the  foot  to  the 
ground.  During  acute  inflammation  rest  is  necessary  and  applications  of 
either  cold  or  hot  water  will  give  relief,  or  the  two  may  be  alternated.  The 
following  lotion  should  be  used:  Laudanum  two  drams,  Goulard's  extract 
of  lead  one  dram,  water  to  make  six  ounces.  Saturate  a  piece  of  lint 
large  enough  to  go  around  the  joint  with' this  lotion  and  cover  with  a  piece 
•of  silk  and  bandage  in  position.  This  dressing  should  be  changed  three 
times  a  day.     Keep  the  bowels  open. 

Calculi  (Stones  in  the  Kidney). — This  is  a  very  dangerous  disorder 
and  fortunately  not  of  common  occurrence.  The  principal  symptom  that 
will  likely  first  attract  the  owner's  attention  is  the  passage  of  blood  with 
the  urine.  In  severe  cases  this  will  be  accompanied  with  pus.  The  dog,  at 
times,  seems  very  ill  and  the  temperature  will  run  up  to  103  or  104  and 
then  subside.  There  is  a  rapid  loss  of  condition  and  a  general  decline; 
pressure  over  the  loins  is  very  painful.  It  should  be  remembered,  however, 
before  diagnosing  a  case  on  this  latter  symptom  alone  that  all  dogs  will 
flinch  if  the  hand  is  passed  over  the  back  and  loins  even  lightly.  Death 
from  calculi  is  the  result  of  uremic  poisoning.  The  treatment  consists  in 
careful  dieting,  keeping  the  bowels  open,  so  that  they  will  do  as  much  of 
the  kidney's  work  as  possible,  and  the  application  of  poultices  or  hot  appli- 
cations to  the  loins  to  relieve  the  severe  pain.  The  diet  should  consist  largely 
of  milk  diluted  with  rain  water,  fresh  boiled  fish,  tripe  and  well-cooked 
rice.  As  an  aperient  give  bicarbonate  of  potash  one  dram,  boro  citrate  of 
magnesia  one  ounce,  hyposulphite  of  soda  one  ounce;  mix  and  give  from 
one-fourth  of  a  teaspoonful  to  a  teaspoonful  three  times  a  day,  depending 
upon  the  size  of  the  dog.     The  medicine  can  be  mixed  with  water  or  milk. 

Refusing  to  Eat. — When  a  well  dog  refuses  to  eat,  it  is  simply  an 
evidence  that  the  system  is  not  in  condition  to  receive  food,  and  that  Nature, 
the  most  reliable  of  healers,  has  decreed  a  fast.     It  should  be  allowed  to 


MISCELLANEOUS  215 

continue  without  drugging  or  attempting  to  stimulate  or  create  an  artificial 
appetite  until  such  time  as  all  is  well  again,  and  then  the  appetite  will  re- 
turn naturally.  The  greatest  fallacy  that  can  be  practiced  is  to  resort  to 
drugs  and  tonics  directly  a  dog  is  capricious  about  his  food  or  eats  less 
heartily  than  usual.  It  is  all  very  well  to  tempt  the  sick  dog  daily  with 
milk  or  a  little  raw,  scraped  beef  and  gelatine,  but  go  no  farther.  It  is  a 
mistake  to  force  food  upon  a  stomach  that  has  no  desire  for  it  and  surely 
retards   return   to   health. 

The  dog  has  remarkable  control  over  the  muscles  of  the  stomach.  It 
can  vomit  at  will  or  by  eating  a  little  grass.  Emptying  the  stomach  re- 
lieves the  system  of  that  which  is  inimical  to  it,  preventing  many  attacks 
of  sickness  and  greatly  protecting  the  digestive  organs.  Vomiting  with 
the  dog,  therefore,  means  but  little,  and  is  not  a  symptom  of  any  par- 
ticular disease,  unless  repeated  violently  at  short  intervals,  when  poisoning 
is  suggested.  It  is  always  well,  however,  to  examine  the  character  of  the 
vomit.  If  mixed  with  blood  or  yellowish  slime,  gastritis  or  inflammation 
of  the  stomach  is  indicated.  If  mixed  with  bilious,  yellowish  matter,  it  is 
probable  that  the  liver  is  out  of  order. 

Straining  to  Urinate. — Foxterrier,  suffers  at  times  from  some  affection 
of  the  bladder,  trying  to  pass  water  with  much  straining.  Appetite  and 
coat  good,   and   does  not  seem   indisposed  otherwise. 

Answer. — Give  5  grains  of  nitrate  of  potash  occasionally;  allow  a  lim- 
ited quantity  of  boiled  water,  with  10  drops  of  dilute  hydrochloric  acid  once 
a  day. 

Lump  on  Groin. — Black  spaniel  has  a  lump  on  the  groins  like  a  cherry. 
Can  I  have  it  cut  off?  Is  it  a  cancer? 

Answer. — The  growth  is  best  removed  by  ligature.  Tie  a  piece  of  strong 
silk  tightly  round,  and  renew  once  a  week  till  it  breaks  away. 

Sulphur,  Proper  Use  of. — Sulphur  is  a  very  excellent  thing,  probably 
the  finest  blood  purifier  that  exists,  but  it  is  insoluble  as  sulphur,  and 
such  well  meaning  people  as  use  it  in  that  form  might  just  as  well  soak 
a  stone,  a  lump  of  coal,  or,  being  millionaires  and  inclined  that  way,  a 
diamond,  for  any  good  it  will  do  the  animal  for  which  it  is  intended.  If 
you  want  to  give  it  you  can  take  a  leaf  out  of  the  nurse's  book  and  go  in 
for  brimstone  and  treacle,  or  use  the  same  in  the  form  of  a  pill,  or  bolus, 
with  other  things,  such  as  cream  of  tartar,  or  merely  sprinkle  flowers  of 
sulphur  in  the  water  so  that  when  drinking  the  dog  laps  some  of  it  up. 

By  all  of  these  means  the  sulphur  is  received  into  the  system  and  a 
portion  absorbed,  which  is  all  that  was  wanted. 

Milk,  Proper  Use  of. — Milk  is  very  beneficial  and  nutricious  in  combi- 
nation with  different  forms  of  food,  has  also  certain  drawbacks.  Given 
alone  not  only  is  it  frequently  an  indubitable  cause  of  worms,  but,  should 
the  bitch's  stomach  be  at  all  upset,  will  turn  acid  and  provide  the  puppies 
with  diarrhoea,  indigestion  and  all  sorts  of  enjoyable  aids  to  the  relief  of 
monotony.  Consequently,  under  any  circumstances,  it  is  well  to  previously 
boil  it  for  some  minutes,  the  addition  of  one-third  lime  water  is  to  be 
advised.  A  much  safer  concoction  is  a  fairly  strong  solution  of  Nestle's 
preparation  which  does  not  contain  the  ova  of  intestinal  parasites,  and  may 
be  trusted  not  to  go  sour  even  during  a  self-respecting  thunderstorm. 

Ulcers  on  the  Tongue — This  painful  condition  when  met  with  in  the 
dog  is  usually  the  result  of  neglect,  the  teeth  being  allowed  to  accumulate 
tartar.  The  ulcers  may  be  due  to  rough  or  decayed  teeth  as  well  as  to  a 
disordered  stomach,  the  latter  being  a  frequent  cause.  In  the  latter  case 
aperients  must  be  administered,  and  a  plain  diet  be  furnished,  and  in  mod- 
erate quantities,  when,  as  the  condition  of  the  stomach  improves,  the  ulcers 
will  disappear.  If  tartar  is  present,  it  must  be  removed  by  scaling,  and  the 
teeth  afterwards  gone  over  with  an  ordinary  tooth-brush  dipped  into  weak 
listerine.  Any  decayed  teeth  must  be  extracted.  The  ulcers  themselevs 
should  be  slightly  touched  with  nitrate  of  silver 

Milk  for  Weaning  Puppies — I  have  some  greyhound  puppies  I  am  wean- 
ing. I  don't  want  to  use  cow's  milk.  Is  there  any  way  of  making  a  mixture 
that  will  give  a  milk  equal  to  the  bitch's  milk?     Ans. — Yes.     Add  to  15 


216  MISCELLANEOUS 

ounces  of  cow's  milk  2  y2  ounces  of  cream,  2  y2  ounces  of  Plasmon,  and  8 
ounces  of  water.  This  will  be  better  and  fresher  than  giving  condensed  milk 
as  you  know  what  you  are  using. 

Boracic  Solution,  to  Make. — Dissolve  a  teaspoonful  of  powdered  boracic 
acid  in  half  a  pint  of  tepid  water. 

Sore  Rectum — Apply  sparingly  twice  a  day  some  compound  hemlock 
and  tannic  acid  ointment  to  the  part.  "Unguentine"  salve  will  also  heal 
up  quickly. 

How  Often  to  Use  a  Stud  Dog. — Owners  of  stud  dogs  have  often  been 
more  or  less  perplexed  as  to  the  quantity  of  bitches  it  is  advisable  to  allow 
a  dog  to  serve  within  a  given  period.  To  satisfy  any  doubt  on  that  point, 
and  for  the  guidance  of  owners,  one  bitch  per  week  the  year  round,  which 
would  give  two  bitches  per  week  during  the  breeding  season,  is  ample  for 
any  dog. 

A  dog  in  good  health  will  take  no  harm  with  a  harem  of  the  dimen- 
sions indicated,  but  more  visitors  he  has  beyond  that  number  and  greater 
will  be  the  strain  upon  his  system.  Too  much  stud  work  impairs  the  dog's 
procreative  faculties,  and  has  not  only  a  tendency  to  produce  weakness  and 
decripitude  in  the  dog's  hindquarters,  but  a  race  of  weakly  offspring  is  like- 
ly to  result. 

To  Improve  the  Coat. — Rub  all  over  dog,  about  once  or  twice  a  week, 
a  mixture  made  with  methylated  spirits,  one  part;  almond  oil,  seven  parts. 

Giving  Raw  Eggs. — Raw  eggs  can  be  easily  fed,  as  it  is  only  necessary 
to  break  off  the  end  of  the  shell,  open  the  dog's  mouth  with  the  fingers  of 
the  left  hand,  and,  withdrawing  the  tongue  somewhat  with  one  or  two  fingers 
of  the  right  hand  allow  the  contents  of  the  egg  to  run  down  his  throat. 
If  he  refuses  to  swallow,  relaxing  the  tongue  will  usually  have  the  desired 
effect. 

Breaking  Dog  of  Sucking  Eggs. — Make  a  small  hole  and  put  in  enough 
syrup  of  ipecac  to  vomit  a  dog,  then  conceal  the  opening  and  put  the  egg 
where  the  dog  will  find  it.  After  that  the  very  sight  of  an  egg  will  make 
him  sick  at  the  stomach. 

Lack  of  Milk. — To  induce  flow  of  milk,  feed  raw  meat  mixed  with  well 
cooked  oatmeal — the  real  oatmeal,  not  the  breakfast  foods,  but  it  must 
be  well  boiled.     Give  some  milk  between  times. 

Paralysis  Before  in  Heat. — Female  Pom.,  7  months,  about  8  lbs.,  com- 
pletely lost  the  use  of  her  hind  legs,  and  her  front  legs  seem  weak,  muscles 
of  neck  appear  to  be  affected,  as  she  has  difficulty  in  picking  up  food,  and 
has  to  be  fed  by  hand;  cannot  move  about  at  all,  and  frequently  has  twitch- 
ings  in  her  legs. 

Answer. — It  is  paralysis  which  occasionally  occurs  in  bitches  before 
coming  in  heat  for  the  first  time.  Give  three  times  a  day  five  grains  of 
the  homeopathic  trituration  of  nux  vomica.  Keep  the  bowels  well  opened, 
and  see  that  the  bladder  operates  regularly.     Do  not  use  liniment. 

Capsules,  Giving  Medicine  in. — Taken  all  round,  there  is  no  better 
method  of  giving  medicine  to  dogs  than  in  the  form  of  flexible  gelatine  cap- 
sules. And  it  is  a  fact  that  a  dog  can  swallow  a  capsule  much  more  readily 
than  a  pill,  so  that  even  a  large  capsule  will  often  slip  down  the  more 
readily  than  quite  a  little  pill  or  bolus.  Capsules  have  many  advantages; 
they  are  much  cleaner,  of  course,  than  powders  and  liquids  to  begin  with. 
Then  they  can  be  made  to  contain  almost  anything;  and  there  are  very  few 
drugs  that  cannot  now  be  concentrated,  so  that  the  chemist  is  able  to  pro- 
duce quite  a  tiny  capsule  containing  quite  a  large  dose  of  physic.  A  few 
things,  like  castor  oil  and  olive  oil,  cannot  be  concentrated,  of  course;  but 
all  the  more  potent  vegetable  products  and  extracts  like  cascara  sagrada, 
can  be  condensed  into  this  small,  convenient  form.  Then  there  is  the  fur- 
ther advantage  of  disintegration.  A  gelatin  capsule  will  dissolve  in  the 
stomach  far  more  quickly  than  a  pill  will  dissolve;  so  you  get  quicker  ac- 
tion and  speedier  result.  In  point  of  fact,  the  pearl  coating  so  common 
nowadays  on  pills  is  frequently  a  great  disadvantage.  It  is  made  of  French 
chalk,  and  often  forms  almost  a  cement,  the  effect  of  which  is  to  prevent 
the  contents  from  disintegrating.   ^ 


MISCELLANEOUS        ,  21? 

Clogging  of  Nazal  Passage  with  Phlegm. — For  this  smear  the  nose 
once  a  day  with  a  little  pine  tar  oil,  which  the  dog  will  lick  off,  and  it 
will  act  like  magic.  Also  get  some  onions,  cut  up  small  and  tie  around  the 
dog's  neck.  If  the  cough  is  very  troublesome,  boil  down  some  onions  and 
brown  sugar  and  give  a  teaspoonful  every  two  hours.  It  is  a  wonderful 
salve  for  the  sore  throat  that  in  most  cases  the  dog  will  have  in  connection 
with  the  nazal  discharge. 

Bitch  Don't  Get  Properly  in  Heat. — Bull  bitch,  over  4  years.  She  does 
not  come  properly  on  heat;  the  parts  are  swollen  for  more  than  four  weeks, 
and  the  discharge  is  never  colored. 

Answer. — The  next  time  the  bitch  shows  signs  of  coming  in  season, 
give  twice  a  day  for  a  week,  made  into  a  pill  with  resin  ointment,  2  grs. 
of  permanganate  of  potash.     Get  14  pills  made  up. 

Bloody  Discharge  From  Ear. — Irish  terrier  continually  shakes  his  head 
and  bloody  matter  runs  from  the  ear  and  his  eyes  are  also  affected,  can 
you  tell  me  what  to  do? 

Answer. — Syringe  out  the  ears  with  a  tablespoonful  of  alcohol  in  a 
gill  of  warm  water;  let  the  dog  shake  his  ears  and  then  wipe  carefully. 
When  dry  fill  the  orifices  with  boracic  acid  powder.  He  should  be  better 
in  two  treatments.  Wipe  out  the  ears  gently  with  absorbent  cotton  several 
times  a  day. 

Excessive  Thirst. — I  have  a  bull  bitch  that  is  out  of  shape.  She  drinks 
as  much  as  a  quart  of  water  at  a  time.     Is  this  due  to  kidney  trouble? 

Answer. — Give  twice  a  day  an  hour  after  feeding,  three  drops  of 
tincture  of  cantharides  in  a  tablespoonful  of  water.  Continue  for  about 
a  week. 

Hair  Grower. — Tincture  cantharides,  solution  of  strong  amonia,  and 
oil  rosemary,  of  each  1  dram;  glycerine  2  drams;  water  to  make  four 
ounces.  Mix,  and  dab  on  the  ear  twice  a  day.  This  was  used  with  success 
on  a  Pomeranian  that  had  no  hair  on  its  ears. 

Puppy  Rash. — Which  often  develops  after  puppies  leave  the  mother, 
can  be  dried  up,  and  if  puppy  should  lick  it,  all  the  better.  Dissolve  a 
teaspoonful  of  liver  of  surphur  (Sulp.  Potass),  in  a  quart  of  warm  water 
and  apply  once  a  day. 

Bites  Dog  May  Get. — Punctured  wounds,  whether  caused  by  the  bite 
of  a  dog  or  some  sharp  instrument,  if  allowed  to  scab  over  at  the  top  before 
healing  has  been  completed  at  the  bottom,  usually  form  an  abscess;  there- 
fore, all  wounds  of  this  character  should  be  induced  to  heal  slowly  from 
the  bottom.  Wash  the  injured  parts  with  warm  water  to  which  carbolic 
acid  has  been  added  in  the  proportion  of  one  part  to  sixty,  or  use  a  warm 
solution  of  boracic  acid,  then  soak  a  pad  of  absorbent  cotton  in  either  one 
of  these  lotions  and  apply  it  to  the  wound,  cover  with  a  piece  of  oiled  silk 
and  bandage.  This  treatment  should  be  continued  until  the  wound  is  healed. 
If  the  skin  is  torn  the  parts  should  be  cleansed  with  the  carbolic  solution 
and  the  edges  of  the  wound  brought  together  with  stitches,  then  apply  a 
pad  of  carbolic  gauze  over  the  parts  and  bandage  in  position.  There  is 
always  danger  of  suppuration,  and  if  it  occurs  remove  two  or  three  stitches, 
so  as  to  give  the  parts  drainage.  The  patient  should  be  prevented  from 
licking  the  wound.  If  an  abscess  forms,  make  an  opening  at  the  softest 
part  and  drain  the  contents,  then  pack  the  wound  with  sterilized  gauze  or 
oakum,  which  should  be  changed  daily.  This  treatment  keeps  the  wound 
open  until  it  has  healed  from  the  bottom. 

Bald  Spots. — These  are  common,  and  if  the  hair  follicle  is  not  destroy- 
ed it  can  be  stimulated  into  activity,  but  if  dead  treatment  is  useless.  If 
the  baldness  is  caused  by  eczema  rub  the  spots  sparingly  with  a  little  green 
iodide  of  mercury,  was  the  next  day  and  apply  lanolin  ointment.  The 
following  lotion  is  also  useful  in  stimulating  the  activity  of  the  roots  of 
the  hair:  Tincture  of  cantharides  two  drams,  oil  of  rosemary  two  drams, 
glycerine  four  drams,  water  to  make  eight  ounces.  Ap^ly  twice  a  day  and 
use  care  to  avoid  getting  into  the  eyes  and  ears. 

Dogs  Too  Fat. — An  excessive  amount  of  fat  is  as  much  a  disease  as 
•maciation.     It  involves  the  heart  and  lungs,  which  are  weakened,     Th« 


2is  Miscellaneous 

liver  and  kidneys  and  the  stomach  all  share  in  the  decline,  and  the  repro- 
ductive functions  decline.  This  condition,  however,  should  not  be  con- 
founded with  dropsy  or  ascites,  and  the  latter  can  be  differentiated  by  the 
fact  that  in  dropsical  disorders  the  flesh  gives  way  under  the  fingers,  while 
the  flesh  of  a  fat  dog  is  comparatively  firm. 

The  appearance  of  the  urine  may  change  greatly  without  the  subject's 
health  being  in  any  way  affected.  An  excessive  amount  of  urine  indicates 
diabetes.  Dard-colored  urine,  during  acute  attacks  of  disease,  simply 
means  that  the  water  which  is  ordinarily  passed  has  been  disposed  of  by  the 
body  in  some  other  way  and  the  excretion  is  condensed.  Straining  indicates 
prostatic  trouble,  inflammation  or  a  partial  paralysis  of  the  parts.  Blood  in 
the  urine  indicates  an  injury  and  is  usually  alarming. 

Indications  of  Various  Troubles. — The  appearance  of  the  passages  in 
either  diarrhoea  or  constipation  always  gives  some  idea  as  to  what  is  going 
on  within  the  system.  If  the  passages  are  clay  colored,  the  secretion  of  bile 
is  defective,  or  the  bile  passages  are  clogged.  In  any  event,  the  liver  is 
involved.  If  the  passages  are  dark  colored  and  of  a  greenish  tinge,  the 
liver  is  too  active  and  too  much  bile  is  being  poured  into  the  bowels. 
Offensive  smelling  passages  indicate  liver  trouble,  intestinal  irritation  or 
digestive  disorders.  The  presence  of  dark  blood  indicates  irritation  of  the 
bowels.  If  the  blood  is  bright  red  and  there  is  much  straining,  a  sharp  bone 
is  probably  being  passed.  Tne  constipation  that  usually  accompanies  fever 
is  the  result  of  a  drying  up  of  watery  matter,  which  leaves  the  passage 
hard  and  chalky. 

The  whine  or  cry  that  dogs  may  utter  will  indicate  to  those  who  are 
familiar  with  them  something  of  their  condition,  for,  as  a  rule,  while  dogs 
bark  upon  the  slightest  provocation,  they  do  not  cry  except  when  in  serious 
trouble.  A  sharp  cry  will,  of  course,  always  suggest  injury.  In  cases  of 
diseases  of  the  head,  when  dogs  feel  that  a  convulsion  is  coming  on,  they 
often  utter  a  short,  high-pitched  cry  that  has  a  crazy  sound.  In  rabies, 
one  of  the  most  characteristic  symptoms  is  a  peculiar  wail,  a  coarse  blended 
howl,  that  once  heard  will  never  be  forgotten. 

Pawing  at  the  side  of  the  head  suggests  ear  troubles.  Hearing,  early 
in  cases  of  brain  trouble,  is  acute;  later,  after  congestion  becomes  pro- 
nounced, it  is  defective.  Lying  on  the  belly,  especially  on  a  strip  of  cold 
concrete  or  wherever  it  is  coolest,  indicates  a  disordered  liver.  Standing 
with  the  legs  braced  or  sitting  up  with  the  legs  apart,  so  as  to  expand  the 
chest,  indicates  pneumonia.  The  arched  back  indicates  inflammation  of 
the  abdominal  regions.  The  sore,  painful  gait,  general  soreness  and  pained 
expression  indicate  rheumatism,  while  a  slow  gait  indicates  debility  or  old 
age. 

Indigestion,  due  to  many  causes,  can  always  be  suspected  in  aged  dogs 
that  go  off  in  flesh  and  refuse  to  fatten,  no  matter  how  much  they  may  eat. 
It  is  also  to  be  suspected  where  the  breath  is  foul  and  bowels  irregular. 

Tapeworm  is  a  frequent  cause  of  many  obstinate  forms  of  skin  diseases 
that  are  recurrent  and  will  not  yield  permanently  to  external  treatment. 

Cold  After  Whelping. — Should  the  dam  take  cold  after  whelping  it 
may  affect  the  milk  glands,  causing  swelling  and  inflammation.  The  very 
best  remedy  for  this  is  sage  ointment,  made  by  taking  a  good  handful  of 
the  leaves  of  common  garden  sage;  either  green  or  dry  may  be  used. 
Simmer  them  in  a  small  teacup  of  lard  for  two  or  three  hours  over  a  slow 
fire,  then  strain  through  muslin  and  set  aside  to  cool. 

It  should  be  applied  hot  and  plentifully  over  the  swelling,  and  be 
gently  but  well  rubbed  in  three  or  four  times  daily,  until  improvement  is 
manifest,  always  rubbing  toward  the  teat,  never  in  any  other  direction.  If 
sage  cannot  be  procured,  the  bark  of  the  root  of  bittersweet  (celastrus 
scandens)  may  be  used  instead,  as  it  is  also  excellent  for  this  purpose,  al- 
though  not  quite  so   efficient  as  sage. 

Postules  Betweefi  Toes. — At  first  they  are  hard  but  soon  come  to  a 
head  and  break,  making  the  dog's  feet  very  tender.  These  eruptions  are 
quite  common  in  English  bulldogs,  or,  in  fact,  any  dog  that  is  crowded  to 
make  flesh  and  bone  or  over  fed  as  all  pets  are  so  frequently.     Wash  the 


MISCELLANEOUS  219 

parts  carefully,  paint  between  the  toes  with  tincture  of  iodine,  and  lance 
the  pustules,  squeezing  out  all  the  matter.  Dry  and  repeat  the  iodine 
whenever  you  see  a  new  pustule  starting. 

Graduated  Scale  of  Medicines. — There  are  many  medicines  prescribed 
for  dogs  and  as  it  is  desirable  that  the  close  should  be  known,  the  following 
graduated  scale  may  be  taken:  The  dose  for  our  largest  dogs  of  eighteen 
months  old  and  upwards  may  be  taken  as  the  same  as  for  a  man.  Taking, 
then,  the  Mastiff  or  St.  Bernard  as  requiring  a  dose  we  may  call  one  part; 
middle-sized  dogs  may  be  given  from  half  to  three-quarters;  Terriers  of 
from  20  to  30  pounds,  a  quarter;  and  Toy  dogs  from  a  twelfth  to  an  eighth 
part.  In  regard  to  age:  The  mature  dog,  one  part;  a  year  old,  three-quar- 
ters; six  to  nine  months,  half;  and  a  pup  of  from  four  to  six  weeks,  one- 
eighth.  The  dose  must  further  be  graduated  by  considerations  of  the  con- 
stitution and  strength  of  the  dog. 

Discharge  in  Bitch  in  Whelp  and  After. — Syringe  passage  out  thorough- 
ly every  day  with  a  teaspoonful  of  powdered  alum  dissolved  in  half  a  pint 
of  warm  water,  and  give  twice  a  day,  made  into  a  pill,  two  grains  of  sul- 
phate of  iron,  which  continue  for  a  week.  The  latter,  the  dose  for  medium 
sized  dog,  toy  dogs  less. 

Liniment,  a  Good. — It  often  happens  that  a  good  liniment  is  needed 
around' the  kennel,  and  a  formula  that  has  been  successfully  used  on  both 
sides  of  the  Atlantic  might  well  be  procured  and  kept  on  hand  for  the  ar- 
rival of  the  unexpected.  Such  a  liniment  is  the  following:  Take  equal  parts 
of  the  following  and  mix:  Spirits  of  turpentine,  laudanum,  rape  oil  and 
liquid  ammonia.  The  latter  should  not  be  the  strong,  but  the  ordinary  va- 
riety. 

This  is  most  useful  in  strains,  sprains,  stiffness,  bruises  and  similar  ac- 
cidents, but  it  should  not  be  used  where  the  flesh  has  been  broken  or  cut. 
It  is  a  very  handy  thing  to  have  around,  and  the  number  of  times  that  a 
bottle  of  it  will  be  called  into  use  will  greatly  surprise  every  one  who  has 
not  employed  a  similar  preparation. 

Bedding  at  Whelping  Time. — There  is  nothing  better  for  bedding,  nor 
perhaps  so  good,  as  clean  straw,  and  a  great  deal  of  this  is  not  recommended 
at  whelping  time,  simply  because  immediately  before  doing  so,  a  bitch  will 
push  all  this  away  from  her  and  get  down  to  the  bare  boards  or  whatever 
the  flooring  of  her  quarters  is.  It  may  be  on  account  of  the  heat,  for  they 
suffer  greatly  even  in  cold  weather  in  this  respect,  or  it  may  be  on  account  of 
cleanliness,  or,  again,  a  habit  acquired  in  the  wild  state  of  making  a  shelter 
all  round  them,  just  in  the  same  way  that  you  will  see  even  a  Toy  dog 
trample  round  two  or  three  times  before  lying  down,  which  is  said  to  be 
derived  from  the  original  wild  dog's  method  of  making  himself  as  com- 
fortable as  circumstances  will  permit. 

Kennel  Lameness. — This  is  a  rheumatic  affection  of  the  fore-quarters, 
and  particularly  of  the  muscles  connecting  the  shoulder-blade  with  the  trunk. 
It  is  caused  by  exposure  to  wet  and  cold,  and  generally  by  the  dog  being 
kept  in  damp  or  draughty  kennels.  The  symptoms  are  stiffness  and  sore- 
ness of  one  or  both  shoulders.  This  is  most  noticeable  when  the  dog  is 
running  down  hill,  or  when  jumping,  as,  of  course,  then,  practically,  the 
whole  of  the  weight  of  the  body  is  on  these  parts.  Left  to  himself,  the 
dog  shows  an  indisposition  to  move,  and  experiences  pain  if  the  hand  is 
passed  over  his  shoulders;  indeed,  even  when  an  attempt  is  made  to  touch 
him,  he  shrinks  from  the  hand  with  a  snarl  or  anticipatory  cry  of  pain. 
In  long-standing  cases,  power  of  movement  of  the  forequarters  is  almost 
lost;  and  many  are  incurable. 

The  treatment  most  advisable  is  to  give  a  warm  bath,  and  after  thor- 
oughly drying,  rub  the  parts  well  with  a  liniment  composed  of  equal  parts 
spirit  of  turpentine,   spirit   of  hartshorn,   and   laudanum. 

Growing  Coat  on  a  Collie. — Dress  dog  all  over  twice  a  week  for  a 
fortnight  with  cocoanut  oil,  kerosene  and  olive  oil  in  equal  parts,  well 
mixed  together.     Do  not  over  brush  the  dog. 

In  case  of  a  dog  of  any  breed  with  bare  spots,  Eberhart's  Skin  Remedy 
will  be  found  to  be  a  great  hair  grower,   (has  never  get  failed  for  me), 


220     i  MISCELLANEOUS 

applied  once  or  twice  daily,  on  the  bare  spots,  well  rubbed  in  with  the  hand. 

To  Increase  Bone  in  Puppy. — Give  puppy  some  large  veal  bones,  or  soft 
beef  bones  to  gnaw  on  and  twice  a  day  a  small  dose  Parish's  Chemical 
Food  after  eating.  The  chemical  food  consists  of  phosphate  of  lime,  also 
phosphate  of  iron. 

Severe  Nervousness. — Dog  may  seem  scared  out  of  his  life,  run  and 
hide  if  it  hears  a  footfall,  may  only  be  induced  to  eat  by  putting  its  food 
under  its  very  nose,  &c.  Dog  may  in  time  improve,  especially  by  very 
kind  treatment.  A  course  of  tonic  medicine,  like  chemical  food,  would 
also  materially  assist,  as  this  medicine  contains  phosphates.  The  food  can 
be  obtained  at  any  good  drug  store. 

Dogs  Eating  Own  Filth. — Some  dogs  have  this  disgusting  habit,  just 
why  is  hard  to  say.  The  only  tangible  reason  would  seem  to  be  a  depraved 
appetite,  caused  by  worms,  the  cause  of  so  many  troubles  in  dogs.  The 
cure  is,  to  watch  dog  and  when  she  has  a  passage  cover  the  feces  with 
powdered  cayenne  pepper,  aside  from  scolding  or  punishing  dog  when 
caught  in  the  act.  After  dog  has  had  a  good  taste  of  the  pepper  it  will  be 
very  liable  to  quit  the  habit. 

Milk  Trouble. — Several  cases  have  come  under  notice  recently  of  milk 
trouble  affecting  bitches.  The  commonest  cause  of  this  is,  of  course,  loss 
of  puppies.  We  might  go  further  and  qualify  the  term  loss  by  saying^that 
very  often  it  is  caused  by  the  senseless  removal  of  puppies,  as,  for  instance, 
when  a  mongrel  litter  arrives,  which  it  is  desired  to  get  rid  of  as  soon  as 
possible.  To  take  all  the  puppies  away  from  the  mother  not  only  con- 
stitutes gross  cruelty,  but  sheer  folly  as  well,  for  it  is  most  likely  that 
the  bitch  in  that  case  will  develop  milk  trouble  in  the  shape  of  tumors  or 
abscesses,  and  she  will  never  be  the  same  animal  again  after  mischief  of 
this  kind  has  once  been  brought  on. 

Supposing,  however,  that  a  milk  abscess  should  form,  the  proper 
treatment  to  adopt  is  to  use  hot  fomentations  continuously.  If  the  matter 
is  taken  in  hand  early  enough,  it  will,  of  course,  be  possible  to  draw  the 
milk  away,  and  this  will  avoid  the  possibility  of  any  abscess  forming. 
Should,  however,  the  latter  unfortunately  occur,  it  is  certainly  advisable 
that  qualified  advice  should  be  taken  and  a  veterinary  surgeon  should  be 
asked  to  deal  with  it,  lest  it  should  ultimately  involve  recourse  to  an  opera- 
tion. Hot  fomentations  or  poultices,  in  any  case,  should  be  applied  until 
the  arrival  of  the  veterinarian,  as  no  possible  harm  can  be  done  by  this 
means. 

Canker  of  the  Mouth. — There  is  trouble  to  which  the  term  canker  is 
applied,  and  that  is  with  regard  to  the  mouth  and  teeth.  Dogs  which 
are  kept  indoors  and  are  pampered  with  dainty  food  of  various  kinds  and 
do  not  get  a  sufficient  amount  of  exercise  are  very  liable  to  dyspepsia,  which 
is  almost  invariably  accompanied  by  an  unhealthy  state  of  the  teeth  and 
mouth.  If  these  be  not  attended  to,  inflammation  of  the  gums  is  set  up, 
and  at  the  same  time  the  teeth  are  apt  to  decay,  and  altogether  a  very  un- 
comfortable state  of  things  is  produced.  Prevention  is,  of  course,  better 
than  cure  in  all  cases  of  this  kind,  and  the  way  to  prevent  it  is  to  stop 
giving  dainty  tit-bits  and  to  feed  the  dog  on  plain,  wholesome  food,  taking 
care  also  that  the  animal  has  an  increased  amount  of  exercise,  together 
with  a  little  corrective  medicine,  such  as  a  compound  rhubarb  pill  now  and 
again,  or  an  occasional  mild  dose  of  Epsom  salt. 

It  is  also  a  good  plan  to  use  a  mouth  wash  composed  of  myrrh  and 
borax,  a  bottle  of  which  can  be  obtained  from  any  good  pharmaceutical 
chemist.  This  needs  to  be  diluted  with  water,  and  should  be  sponged  on 
the  inflamed  gums.  Needless  to  say,  if  the  teeth  show  any  signs  of  decay, 
they  should  at  once  be  extracted  by  a  competent  veterinary  surgeon,  be- 
cause if  one  tooth  goes  wrong,  it  is  quite  likely  to  start  decay  in  a  number 
of  the  others.  The  lotion  recommended  above  ought  to  be  used  twice  or 
three  times  a  day,  and  the  alterative  medicine  should  be  given  every  two 
or  three  days,  according  to  circumstances. 

Flatulency. — Is  not  very  common  in  adult  dogs,  but  oftener  met  with 
in  puppies.     It  Is  unmistakable  evidence  of  indigestion.     For  immediate  re- 


MISCELLANEOUS  221 

lief  the  treatment  should  consist  in  giving  to  a  twenty-p«und  dog  half  a 
teaspoonful  of  carbonate  of  magnesia  in  a  little  milk;  large  dogs  a  teaspoon- 
ful;  or  give  a  dose  of  castor  oil,  and  follow  with  5  to  15  grammes  of  car- 
bonate of  bismuth  three  times  a  day  dry  upon  the  tongue.  For  permanent 
cure,  correct  the  indigestion. 

Ticks. — Ordinarily  feed  upon  vegetable  food,  but  they  have  no  hesita- 
tion in  attaching  themselves  to  dogs  and  gorging  themselves  almost  to 
bursting  upon  blood.  They  are,  so  far  as  family  connections  are  concerned, 
related  to  spiders,  and  in  form  they  somewhat  resemble  the  latter.  In  size 
they  vary  from  a  pin  head  to  a  small  flea.  When  small  they  are  a  light 
gray  in  color,  but  become  darker  as  they  gorge  themselves  with  blood. 
They  fasten  themselves  on  the  skin  with  such  tenacity  as  to  be  torn  in  two 
before  letting  go.  When  once  they  get  into  a  kennel  no  time  should  be 
lost  in  beginning  treatment,  as  they  lodge  and  breed  in  the  bedding  and 
woodwork  as  well  as  on  the  dog. 

The  lime  and  sulphur  lotion  given  under  Lice,  can  be  used  for  ticks, 
or  Eberhart's  Skin  Remedy  will  do  the  work,  if  well  rubbed  in  and  allowed 
to  remain  on,  and  repeated. 

Teaching  a  Puppy  to  Lead. — Quite  a  job  in  some  cases,  and  in  others, 
not  so  hard.  Best  time  to  do  this,  is  when  they  are  six  months  old.  Put  a 
collar  on  pup,  he  won't  mind  uiis  much,  let  him  wear  it  a  week,  then  some 
day,  quarter  of  an  hour  before  his  supper  tie  him  up  to  some  convenient 
spot.  He  will  promptly  proceed  to  try  to  strangle  himself,  and  this  not 
found  pleasant,  will  quit  this,  and  then  probably  crouch  to  the  ground, 
giving  it  up  as  a  bad  job,  but  looking  very  miserable;  but  brighten  up  when 
you  bring  him  his  supper.  Save  a  few  pieces  of  meat  in  your  hand,  untie 
him,  take  hold  of  the  lead,  hold  out  a  piece  of  the  meat  and  coax  him  to 
come  to  you.  Repeat  the  lesson  if  neccessary,  but  as  soon  as  he  under- 
stands the  lesson  the  finishing  of  the  training  will  not  take  but  a  day  or  two. 
Wounds. — Dalziel's  article  on  Wounds  is  given  complete:  "For  the  pur- 
pose of  description  these  can  be  divided  into  Incised,  Lacerated,  Punctured 
and  Contused. 

"Incised  Wounds  are  those  caused  by  a  clean  cut,  such  as  a  sharp-edged 
instrument.  Lacerated  wounds  are  those  in  which  the  tissues  are  torn  and 
the  edges  of  the  wound  irregular;  punctured  wounds  those  caused  by  stabs 
or  probes;  while  contused  wounds  are  those  due  to  crushing  and  bruising. 

"The  process  of  healing  is  accomplished  in  different  ways,  according  to 
the  nature  of  the  wound  and  the  condition  of  the  surrounding  parts. 
"1.   First  intention — that  is,  by  immediate  reunion   of  the  parts. 
"2.  Adhesive  inflammation,  in  which  there  is  an  exudation  of  lymph  in 
both  cut  surfaces. 

"3.  Granulation,  where  the  wound  gradually  heals  by  the  formation  of 
proud  flesh. 

"4.  The  union  of  granulations. 

"5.  The  commoner  and  more  usual  method  of  healing,  under  a  scab. 
"In  incised  wounds  the  parts  should  be  cleansed,  and  the  bleeding  ar- 
rested, any  hair  should  be  removed,  and  the  lips  or  edges  of  the  wound 
brought  into  immediate  contact  by  sutures.  Where  practicable,  the  whole 
should  be  covered  with  dry  carbolized  tow  and  a  bandage.  A  muzzle  must 
be  worn,  or  the  stitches  will  be  torn  out,  causing  an  unsightly  wound  that 
must  then  heal  by  granulation,  while  instead  of  a  very  alight  scar,  a  large 
one  will  be  the  result.  In  adhesive  inflammation  the  mode  of  treatment  is 
the  same;  it  has,  however,  been  proved  beyond  doubt  that  dry  dressings 
are  much  preferable  to  any  other.  The  old  method  of  dressing  with  oils, 
etc.,  is  no  longer  continued.  The  commonest  method  of  healing  is  by 
granulation  under  a  scab  as  already  noted. 

"In  wounds  I  have  found  the  carbolized  tow  and  carbolized  gauze  the 
most  successful.  The  object  of  these  is  to  prevent  suppuration,  if  possible, 
by  keeping  the  hair  aseptic.  Especially  is  this  the  case  when  one  ig  trying 
to  heal  a  wound  by  first  intention,  or  by  adhesive  inflammation.  In  other 
wounds  it  keeps  them  healthy.  The  wound  must  be  constantly  washed  and 
kept  thoroughly  clean.     If  it  is  a  serious  ope,  or  there  is  much  discharge, 


222  MISCELLANEOUS 

it  should  be  dressed  twice  a  day.  Where  proud  flesh  appears,  it  should 
be  kept  under  by  the  application  of  nitrate  of  silver;  again  if  the  wound 
is  unhealthy-looking,  and  the  healing  process  is  retarded,  a  slight  applica- 
tion of  nitrate  of  silver  will  often  stimulate  it  to  healthier  growth. 

"In  all  cases  where  the  wounds  heal  by  the  process  of  granulation  it 
is  absolutely  necessary  that  the  repairing  process  should  begin  at  the  bot- 
tom, and  so  gradually  close  the  wound.  Should  it  occur  at  the  surface,  the 
pus  will  be  imprisoned,  burrow  between  the  muscles,  and  find  an  exit  or 
exits  elsewhere  in  the  shape  of  abscesses;  or  the  pus  will  form  sinuses,  which 
will  necessitate  making  large  incisions.  All  wounds  should  be  examined 
well  for  the  purpose  of  detecting  the  presence  of  foreign  matter,  and  again 
hemorrhage   (bleeding)  must  be  stopped  before  suturing. 

"In  puncturd  wounds,  the  wound  should  be  explored  by  means  of  a 
silver  probe,  so  that  the  exact  extent  of  the  injury  can  be  ascertained,  and 
foreign  matter  removed.  If  this  latter  is  overlooked,  the  result  is  often 
blood-poisoning  and  death.  Punctured  wounds  must  always  heal  by  granu- 
lation; where  there  is  any  suspicion  of  foreign  matter,  always  have  re- 
course to  a   poultice. 

"Contused  wounds  are  generally  successfully  treated  by  poulticing  and 
fomentations,  but  if  the  injury  is  severe,  sloughing  may  take  place.  The 
final  healing  is  by  granulation.  Always  bear  in  mind  to  keep  the  wound 
clean. 

"To  summarise  the  general  treatment  of  wounds.  First  stop  the 
bleeding,  remove  the  hair  and  examine  for  the  presence  of  foreign  matter, 
and  where  this  exists  remove  it.  If  there  is  any  doubt  about  it,  apply  a  hot 
poultice  night  and  morning  until  satisfied  that  the  wound  is  cleansed; 
where  it  is  practicable,  always  insert  sutures  to  keep  the  edges  together. 

"As  I  have  already  said,  dry  dressings  are  the  most  successful,  such 
as  carbolized  tow,  and  gauze  (Listers'  carbolized  gauze)  with  a  pledget  of 
tow  over  it,  kept  in  position  by  a  bandage.  In  some  situations  this  is  not 
possible.  The  wound  should  be  dressed  night  and  morning  with  carbolic 
lotion:  Carbolic  acid  1  part,  water  20  parts,  with  a  little  glycerine  added. 
Or  a  saturated  solution  of  boracic  acid  will  do  equally  as  well." 