
0




USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  239 


USEFUL  INFORMATION    REGARDING  DOGS 


Buying  Dogs. — In  buying  a  dog,  first  be  sure  that  you  are  dealing  with 
some  recognized  breeder  who  will  not  send  a  dog  C.  O.  D.,  and  you  will  al- 
ways get  a  dog  just  as  represented.  No  legitimate  breeder  or  dealer  can 
afford  to  act  any  way  but  fair  and  square  with  you,  as  it  would  get  him 
into  serious  trouble  with  the  American  Kennel  Club,  and  for  wrong  doing 
he  would  be  punished  and  disqualified,  which  means  that  he  could  not 
exhibit  any  of  his  dogs  at  any  Bench  Show  held  under  their  rules,  nor 
could  he  register  any  of  his  dogs  in  their  stud  book  while  disqualified.  So 
you  can  see  how  safe  you  are  in  buying  a  dog  and  sending  your  money  on 
in  advance,  if  you  are  sure  first  that  you  are  dealing  with  a  breeder  of 
note  and  reputation,  as  you  are  protected  by  the  American  Kennel  Club 
of    New    York. 

Very  few  legitimate  breeders  will  ship  a  dog  C.  O.  D.  for  many  good 
and  sufficient  reasons.  It  is  harder  on  the  dog,  as  coming  collect,  he  ne- 
cessarily has  to  go  through  a  lot  of  red  tape  business,  and  this  delays  his 
delivery  in  most  every  instance,  going  from  train  to  uptown  city  office,  a 
delay  here  of  course  to  check  up  and  fix  way  bills,  books,  etc.,  and  gen- 
erally then  delivered  after  all  this  delay  by  another  wagon. 

Select  a  good  breeder  to  buy  from  and  write  him  for  a  full  description 
in  detail  as  to  all  points  of  the  dog  and  its  price,  then  send  him  a  money 
order  or  draft  for  the  dog  with  orders  to  ship  on  the  guarantee  that  the  dog 

is  to  be  exactly  as  described  and  represented.     Now,  when  you  get  him 

after  he  feels  at  home,  recovered  from  his  trip,  and  acts  and  looks  himself 
— then  compare  dog  with  description  you  have  had,  and  my  word  for  it 
your  dog  will  fill  the  bill. 

If  dissatisfied  for  any  cause  don't  be  hasty  about  returning  him,  but 
wait  a  day  or  two,  give  the  dog  a  chance  to  rest  up,  taking  good  care  of  him 
meanwhile,  and  then  write  to  the  dealer,  and  he  can,  and  will,  no  doubt, 
straighten  the  matter  up  so  that  you  are  satisfied.  Unless  the  buyer  is  a 
judge  of  the  breed  ordered  (which  the  seller  is),  it  might  happen  that 
as  good  or  even  a  better  specimen  had  been  sent  than  was  promised, 
and  yet  not  come  up  to  the  expectations  of  the  buyer  according  to  his 
erroneous  ideas,  or,  it  didn't  "look  like  Mr.  So-and-So's  dog,"  etc.,  and 
here  is  the  chance  for  the  seller  to  explain  and  put  you  right,  as  to  what 
constitutes  a  good  and  correct  specimen,  which  is  really  what  you  want, 
only  you  don't  know  it.  These  are  rare  cases,  of  course,  the  exception 
and  not  the  rule.  Bench  shows  are  educating  people  on  dogs,  and  a  good 
many  could  now  fairly  judge  the  dog  they  had  ordered. 

Always  go  to  headquarters  to  buy  anything,  and  here  I  want  to  say 
a  few  words  as  to  buying  a  dog  from  bird  stores.  They  are,  as  a  rule, 
a  poor  place  to  buy  a  dog — a  much  better  place  to  buy  a  bird  or  bird  seed! 

Being  only  dealers  and  only  having  a  scant  general  idea  of  dogs,  the 
dealer  may  be  honest  enough,  yet  deceive  his  customer  as  to  a  dog,  simply 
because  the  seller  fooled  him  when  he  bought  the  dog  to  sell  again.  This 
is  often  the  case  in  a  bird  store  buying  a  litter  of  puppies.  They  look  cute 
as  puppies,  but  often  turn  out  to  be  curs  when  grown  up,  because  the 
mother  of  them  had  a  mishap,  got  out,  and  was  bred  to  some  outside  dog 
of  another  breed,  so  the  owner  packs  them  up  in  a  basket  and  sells  them 
for  almost  any  price  to  the  bird  store.     He  puts  them  in  his  window  at  a 

price  lower  than  the  genuine  article  could  be  sold  for;   people  see  them 

they  look  cute — you  buy  one,  thinking  you  got  a  great  bargain.  You  raise 
this  puppy  and,  of  course,  become  attached  to  it,  but  gradually  it  develops 


24<|  USEFUL  INFORMATION   REGARDING  DOGS. 

into  a  common  cur,  and  you  are  competed  to  apollogize  for  your  pet  when 
your  friends  visit  you.  "Silk  is  never  sold  for  the  price  of  calico.  All 
fine  bred  animals  cost  more  because  they  are  harder  to  raise.  Always  be 
willing  to  pay  a  fair  priee  for  a  good  one.  Buy  of  legitimate  breeders  and 
you'll  get  the  worth  of  your  money. 

Receiving  Dogs. — If  you  buy  a  dog  that  comae  to  you  by  express  and 
has  had  a  long  trip,  having  left  his  home  to  come  to  a  new  one  and  among 
strangers,  and  he  at  first  should  act  scared,  shy  or  sulky,  and,  of  course, 
then  not  look  his  best,  don't  conclude  that  the  dog  is  not  as  he  was  repre- 
sented by  the  seller,  and  that  you  have  been  fooled,  but  speak  to  him 
kindly  pet  him,  and  it  won't  be  long  till  he  will  see  that  be  has  found 
a  friend  mi  his  new  master,  and  while,  no  doubt,  he  may  think  of  the 
home  and  friends  he  has  left,  and  very  often  silently  grieve  for  them,  yet 
he  will  Quickly  learn  to  love  the  new  master,  and  show  by  his  actions 
how  happy  he  is  in  his  new  home.  When  thus  at  his  ease  and  recovered 
from  the  strain  and  excitement  of  the  trip,  he  will  act  and  look  himself 
aeain  and  now  is  the  time  to  judge  him  and  see  if  he  is  not  as  repre- 
sented, which  he  will  prove  to  be,  I  think,  especially  if  he  was  purchased 
from  a  reliable  breeder. 

When  you  take  the  dog  out  of  his  crate,  unless  he  has  a  collar  on 
and  vou  at  first  hold  him  by  this  or  his  chain,  the  best  plan  is  to  take  him 
out  of  the  box  in  a  yard  or  room,  for  he  might  be  badly  frightened  under 
the  circumstances  and  get  away  from  you.  Also  see  the  first  thing  that  his 
collar  is  tight  enough,  so  no  danger  of  his  slipping  it  over  his  head  if 
scared    and  getting  away  perhaps. 

Very  many  dogs  I  receive  for  shows  have  a  collar  on  so  loose  that,  if 
from  fright  or  any  undue  cause,  they  could  easily  slip  it  off  and  escape. 
Don't  have  it  so  tHght  that  it  chokes,  but  just  so  you  can  run  your  finger 
around  under  it  is  right— and  safe.  While  for  many  years  I  have  been 
a  orofessional  handler  of  dogs  at  bench  shows,  having  at  some  shows  as 
manv  as  seventy  dogs  of  all  breeds  to  receive  and  care  for  during  the  week, 
and  the  greater  part  of  them  being  strange  to  me,  this  being  our  first  in- 
troduction I  never  had  any  trouble,  and  not  a  dog  in  the  many  I  have  thus 
handled  for  others  but  was  just  as  good  a  friend  of  mine,  and  quickly, 
too    as  were  my  own  favorites  that  I  had  brought  from  my  kennels.     . 

'  After  receiving  a  dog,  gife  him  a  chance  in  the  yard  to  attend  to 
nature's  calls,  which  he  will  very  likely  want  to  do,  and  you  watch,  to 
kpp  the  condition  of  his  bowels.  He  may  be  either  constipated  or  vice  versa, 
Either  due  to  having  "held  in"  for  too  long  a  trip  in  his  box.  Very  many 
matured  dogs  will  not  "empty"  in  a  box  on  a  trip,  and  herein  lies  the 
greatest  danger  of  long  trips  by  express  when  they  do  not  empty  in  box, 
the  verv  natural  result  being  either  inflammation  of  the  bowels  or  kidneys 
-—either  or  both.  If  dog  is  bound  up,  the  feces  being  voided  with  a  hard 
pffort  and  it  is  dry  and  very  hard,  give  the  dog  a  dose  of  castor  and  olive 
oil  mixed  If  bowels  are  too  loose,  passage  running  from  dog  too  freely 
and  very  thin  attend  to  this,  as  treated  under  its  heading,  but  such  cases 
eenerally  yield  to  proper  feeding  for  a  day  or  so  with  foods  to  fit  the  case. 
A  nuppy  will  often  stand  a  long  trip  (if  fed  and  watered  en  route)  better 
than  an  adult  dog,  because  the  pups  will  attend  to  nature's  calls  en  route, 
which  is  all  the  better  even  if  it  arrives  soiled  from  so  doing — almost  cer- 
tain to  be  so,  confined  in  a  box. 

Receiving  Puppies. — Many  people  who  buy  puppies  do  not  give  them 
nrooer  care  on  their  arrival  in  the  new  home.  In  order  to  insure  success 
with  a  puppy  take  it  carefully  from  the  crate  in  which  it  is  received,  mak- 
ine  as  little  noise  as  possible  in  so  doing.  Speak  to  it  in  a  pleasant  and 
svmnathetic  way,  calling  it  by  its  name,  if  it  has  any,  which  fact  should 
alwavs  be  ascertained  before  receipt  of  the  puppy  from  the  seller,  if  possi- 
hle  After  removal  from  the  crate,  be  careful  that  the  puppy  does  not 
eet  frightened  and  run  off  and  hide.  In  order  to  avoid  this,  let  the 
vounester  out  into  a  space  of  moderate  size  at  first.  Bear  In  mind 
that  the  journey,  however  short,  has  had  the  tendency  to  frighten  and  make 
nervous  any  young  dog.  .  

242  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

After  allowing  the  puppy  some  freedom  and  an  outing  in  an  enclos- 
ure, for  sufficient  length  of  time  for  it  to  attend  to  nature's  calls,  give  it 
a  bowl  of  boiled  milk  and  bread  broken  up,  or  a  soft-boiled  egg  or  two. 
Feed  light  for  a  few  days,  at  morning,  noon  and  night.  If  kept  out  of 
draughts  and  petted,  the  puppy  should  soon  get  fully  accustomed  to  his  new 
home,  and  the  sooner  it  is  made  to  feel  at  home  by  kindness  and  attention 
the  better  it  will  thrive  and  grow,  and  the  less  will  it  feel  the  shock  of  the 
change  to  its  new   quarters. 

Remember  that  while  it  may,  and  probably  did,  start  clean,  it  may  reach 
you  soiled,  due  to  getting  in  its  own  filth  in  box,  so  this  must  be  con- 
sidered, and  you  remember  that  a  bath,  if  only  a  sponging  off,  if  in  win- 
ter, and  on  their  very  thorough  drying,  will  soon  very  much  improve  its 
appearance.  Before  you  buy  a  pup,  or  even  an  adult  dog,  find  out  from 
its  seller  if  it  has  been  thoroughly  and  successfully  treated  for  worms, 
and  if  not,  attend  to  this  promptly — (See  Worms).  Very  few  breeders, 
however,  nowadays,  but  do  treat  all  their  puppies  for  worms  before  sell- 
ing or  shipping — which  they  should  do.  The  dog  you  receive  may  bowl  or 
cry  the  first  night  in  his  new  home,  don't  be  surprised  if  it  does  (you  might 
do  the  same  under  the  same  circumstances),  but  put  up  with  this — the  dog 
is  worth  all  the  trouble  or  interruption  it  might  cause  you — and  kindness 
will  soon  cure  it  of  this. 

Females  as  Pets. — In  selecting  a  dog  for  a  pet,  the  erroneous  idea 
seems  to  prevail  to  a  great  extent  of  always  getting  a  male.  Here  is  where 
you  often  make  a  mistake,  for  if  you  have  only  one  dog,  a  female  is  pref- 
erable in  many  respects.  In  the  first  place,  a  female  is  more  affectionate, 
or  shows  it  more  than  a  male,  is  cleaner  about  the  house,  more  obedient,  and 
less  liable  to  run  away.  The  objection  to  a  female  seems  to  be  that  she 
will  come  in  season;  so  she  will,  but  this  only  happens  once  in  every  five 
to  seven  months,  and  then  till  again  in  season  you  have  no  trouble.  A 
male  dog  is  always  "in  season,"  and  should  there  be  a  female  that  is  in 
season,  even  a  mile  away,  he  will  find  it  out,  and,  unless  chained  up,  or 
gates  of  your  yard  watched  very  closely,  your  dog  is  gone,  and  then  you 
find  out  what  he  discovered  long  before  you  did.  Perhaps  he'll  find  his 
way  home  again,  but  the  chances  are  much  against  it,  and  you'll  now  have 
the  chance  to  offer  a  reward  for  the  return  of  your  dog. 

Perhaps  you'll  get  him  back,  and  perhaps  you  won't.  If,  when  your 
female  comes  in  season,  you  don't  care  to  have  her  around,  you  send  her 
to  some  kennel  to  board  for  a  couple  of  weeks  (as  many  do  with  me),  and 
thus  save  yourself,  for  a  trifling  cost  all  this  annoyance.  There  must  be 
females  or  there  wouldn't  be  any  dogs  at  all.  When  a  female  first  shows 
signs,  if  you  will  make  note  of  the  first  day,  you'll  discover  a  bleeding, 
which  will  continue  for  from  eight  to  ten  days,  a  swelling  of  the  vagina 
with  it.  This  bleeding  and  swelling  will  begin  to  subside  at  from  ten  to 
twelve  days,  and  then  is  when  she  is  ready  for  breeding.  You  can't  watch 
her  too  closely,  for  they  are  very  cute  and  cunning,  at  such  times,  and  will 
often  fool  you  by  slipping  out,  and  then  when  ready,  the  first  dog  they 
meet  is  the  favored  one.  Such  mistakes  as  this,  due  to  carelessness,  is  what 
produces  so  many  curs  that  we  see  on  the  streets  of  every  town  or  city. 
While  I  love  any  dog,  yet  I  love  best  a  thoroughbred.  The  cur  may  be  as 
smart  and  as  true  and  faithful  as  the  pure  bred  one,  but  there  should  be 
no  curs,  and  would  not  be  if  people  were  more  careful  at  such  times. 

In  case  your  female  should  get  out,  and  served  by  some  dog  on  the 
streets,  and  you  desire  to  get  rid  of  the  puppies,  do  so  as  soon  as  they  are 
born.  Drowning  is  then  the  best  way  to  do  it.  Take  one  pup  at  a  time  and 
hold  it  in  a  pail  of  water  till  dead,  or,  you  can  put  the  whole  litter  in  a 
pail  of  water,  putting  a  weight  or  stone  on  top  of  a  cover  that  will  hold 
it  down  to  the  water.  To  guard  against  danger  of  a  caked  breast  in  the 
mother,  it  may  be  advisable  to  allow  one  pup  to  live  and  nurse  for  a  week; 
harder  on  the  pup  to  be  then  drowned,  however. 

Another  instant  death  is  a  teaspoonful  of  Scheele's  Prussic  Acid  for 
matured  dogs.  In  giving  it  hold  mouth  open  and  upwards,  pouring  the  li- 
puid  well  back  on  the  tongue.     Great  care  is  necessary  in  handling  such  a 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  243 

potent  drug,  as  it  would  be  dangerous  to  human  life  if  spilled  over  a  cut 
or  wound. 

Shipping  Dogs  by  Express. — This  is  a  very  important  matter,  and  the 
greatest  precautions  must  be  taken  and  care  exercised  unless  you  are  so 
heartless  as  to  not  care  how  much  cruelty  and  hardship  the  dog  endures, 
especially  on  a  trip  of  over  twelve  hours  unless  properly  crated,  watered 
and  fed,  and  a  day  and  night  trip  is  just  so  much  harder.  If  it  is  a  grown 
dog,  an  adult,  food  for  twenty-four  hours  they  can  do  without,  and  no  harm, 
but  in  case  of  a  young  puppy,  it  must  have  food  at  least  twice  a  day  even 
if  only  for  a  day  or  night  trip.  This  you  can  arrange  for  by  sending  food  in 
a  bag  tied  onto  the  box  and  a  large,  prominent  request  on  box,  "Please 
Feed  Morning  and  Night — Food  in  Bag."  If  an  adult  dog,  and  trip  is  a 
day  and  night  only,  then  drop  a  big  bone  or  two  in  box  for  it  to  gnaw  on, 
or  a  few  dog  cakes.  Fasten  tin  pan  or  cup  inside  in  one  corner,  up  a  few 
inches  from  floor  for  water  and  a  big  request  on  box,  "Please  Water  Often," 
especially  if  in  hot  weather.  Now,  as  to  longer  trips  than  twenty-four  hours, 
extra  attention  must  be  given.  My  plan  is  as  follows:  I  first  go  to  my  ex- 
press agent,  have  him  look  up  best  time  to  start  dog  for  best  trip  and  as 
to  connections.  Then  if  trip  is  to  be  two  days  or  longer,  I  get  him  to 
write  on  ahead  at  least  twenty-four  hours  to  the  agents  at  any  stations 
where  dog  has  a  "lay  over"  of  an  hour  or  longer,  asking  this  agent  to 
there  take  out  the  dog  on  chain  to  attend  to  nature's  calls,  also  to  feed 
and  water.  I  find  no  difficulty  in  getting  such  favors  shown  by  asking  my 
agent,  and  you  can  no  doubt  do  the  same  from  your  agent,  whom  you  pro- 
bably know  or  he  knows  you.  To  have  dog  taken  out  you  must  have  a 
door  so  they  can  do  as  requested.  By  arranging  this  way,  your  dog  is 
reasonably  assured  of  some  comfort  added  to  his  long  and  hard  trip.  The 
greatest  danger  of  these  long  trips  are  from  inflammation  of  the  kidneys  or 
bowels,  due  to  not  emptying,  and  this  almost  always  the  result  if  a  dog 
"holds  in"  for  over  twenty-four  hours,  which  is  even  too  long  for  safety. 
Now  as  to  the  box,  which  must  be  made  right.  If  dog  is  to  go  in  fall  or 
winter,  or  any  season  subject  to  quick  changes,  unless  you  have  a  good,  reg- 
ular dog  crate.  Several  now  made  for  dogs.  (See  LeGalle  Bros',  adv.  in 
this  book),  then  make  your  box  the  height  of  the  dog  at  his  shoulder,  as 
long  as  his  body  and  head  and  just  wide  enough  so  he  can  turn  around  by 
bending  his  body,  and  he  will  be  comfortable,  as  a  box  too  large  is  just  as 
bad.  Make  it  open  on  the  sides  and  top  for  air,  but  have  the  lower  half 
of  each  side  and  end  tightly  closed  so  that  the  dog  when  lying  down  is 
not  exposed  to  draught,  as  they  are  often  kept  outside  in  a  depot  open  at 
ends,  on  a  truck,  and  thus  right  in  a  draught,  and  having  come  from  a 
warm  car,  the  natural  result  would  be  a  cold  or  perhaps  pneumonia.  I 
always  have  request  sent  on  ahead,  on  a  winter  trip,  to  "please  keep 
inside  where  warm  at  any  lay  overs,"  and  this  you  can  have  done  also. 

Give  him  plenty  of  straw  in  his  box  if  in  winter.  Make  box  on  top 
like  the  roof  of  a  house  so  that  there  is  no  danger  of  his  being  smothered 
as  he  could  be  perhaps  if  box  was  square,  by  express  messenger  putting 
him  in  a  corner  and  another  box  or  trunk  on  the  top  and  sides  of  his  box, 
thus  depriving  him  of  air.  Make  box  so  there  is  no  danger  of  this  hap- 
pening. Fasten  by  nailing  inside  box,  in  one  corner,  a  tin  cup  or  pan,  about 
right  distance  up,  then  spend  a  nickel  for  aother  tin  cup  and  fasten  this 
one  on  the  outside  of  his  box  by  a  string  or  wire,  so  that  there  is  no  ex- 
cuse for  the  express  messenger  not  doing  what  all  shippers  pay  express 
companies  double  rates  for  doing — caring  for  dogs  en  route.  Express  cars 
seldom  have  any  water  in  them  (the  messenger  himself  when  thirsty  going 
back  to  the  next  coach  for  his  drink),  and  this  tin  cup  tied  on  outside 
and  a  written  request  tacked  on  box,  "Please  water  often,"  leaves  it  easy 
for  him  to  bring  the  dog  a  drink,  the  facilities  being  handy.  Did  you  ever 
notice  how  often  in  traveling  in  hot  weather  you  will  visit  the  water  cooler? 

Never  Start  a  Dog  on  a  Full  Stomach;  the  motion  of  the  car  would 
very  likely  make  him  sick  and  cause  him  to  throw  up  what  he  had  eaten, 
soiling  his  box  and  himself  as  well. 

The  night  you  are  to  ship  dog  give  him  a  fair  meal  that  afternoon, 


$44  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

and  an  hour  before  he  is  to  leave  take  him  out  for  a  walk  of  a  half  dozen 
blocks  or  more,  and  he  will  be  sure  to  attend  to  nature's  calls.  If  you 
start  dog  on  a  morning  train,  get  up  early  enough  that  morning  to  attend 
to  this  before  he  leaves.  Then  offer  him  a  drink  before  he  starts  and  thus 
he  leaves  with  an  empty  stomach  and  will  have  a  much  more  comfortable 
trip  than  if  he  started  after  having  had  a  full  meal.  Many  house-broken 
dogs  will  "hold  in"  and  will  not  do  anything  in  their  traveling  box,  which 
will  cause  inflammation  of  the  bowels  or  kidneys.  Better  for  the  dog  if  it 
did  break  the  rule  for  this  time.  Puppies  of  course  are  not  so  systematic 
and  generally  get  through  better  if  suitably  crated. 

Now  make  a  prominent  sign  like  this  and  tack  it  on  top  of  box: 

AN   "OPEN   LETTER"    FROM   A   DOG. 

Mr.  Messenger — My  name  is   I  am  on  a  hard,  long  trip, 

and  can  only  get  through  with  your  assistance  and  kind  care,  for  which  I 
will  thank  you  in  my  way.  I  will  not  bite  you!  Confinement  in  this 
box  is  bad  enough — but  I  do  need  a  drink  and  a  bite  to  eat. 

Some  express  messengers  are,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  afraid  of  dogs,  but 
by  furnishing  them  the  name  of  dog,  when  they  speak  to  him  he — the  dog 
■ — will  think  he  has  found  a  friend,  probably  wag  his  tail  and  give  an  as- 
surance by  his  looks  to  the  messenger  that  he  is  all  right,  and  thus  secure 
better  care  and  some  kind  words  from  the  messenger  and  add  to  the  dog's 
comfort  on  the  trip, 

Always  crate  a  dog,  never  ship  him  on  chain  for  several  good  reasons. 
Crating  is  safer,  cleaner,  and  more  comfortable  for  the  dog.  On  chain  he 
takes  too  many  chances.  He  may  slip  his  collar  and  jump  out  of  the  car 
door,  or  in  a  crowded  car  a  trunk  or  box  might  fall  on  and  injure  him,  and 
besides,  the  express  company's  charge  for  any  dog  on  chain  is  not  less  than 
a  hundred  pounds,  even  if  it  was  only  a  twenty-pound  dog. 

Always  notify  by  previous  mail  or  by  wire  the  party  who  is  to  get  the 
dog,  so  that  he  may  know  when  to  look  for  him  and  meet  the  dog  at  depot, 
thus  shortening  his  trip  a  bit  and  avoiding  the  delay  caused  by  the  dog 
being  taken  first  to  city  express  office,  laying  there  awhile  and  then  drove 
around  to  the  house  he  is  directed  to. 

Don't  ship  a  3x1  dog  in  a  3x1  crate.  You  like  to  stretch  yourself 
sometimes.  Neither  should  you  ship  it  in  a  box  far  too  large.  A  dog  in 
such  a  box  will  often  receive  a  nasty  knock  in  being  handled  none  too 
gently  by  the  messenger;  if  you  do,  besides,  you  or  the  other  fellow  will 
have  to  pay  useless  express  charges. 

Dogs  Chained  Up. — I  do  not  believe  in  chaining  dogs  up  in  a  yard,  but 
if  you  want  him  chained  at  night  don't  make  it  too  short — and  he  must 
have  freedom  during  the  day.  To  keep  a  dog  chained  constantly  day  and 
night  is  cruel  and  inhuman,  and  will  make  any  dog  cross.  Dogs  are  not 
born  cross — you  never  saw  a  cross  puppy — and  when  you  see  a  cross  dog 
some  human  being — man,  woman  or  some  good-for-nothing  boy — is  to 
blame  for  it,  not  the  dog.  There  would  be  no  cross  dogs  if  people  were 
not  the  cause  of  it  by  their  ill  treatment  of  the  dog  any  more  than  there 
would  be  a  balky  horse  only  for  men — fools  and  brutes — who  make  balky 
horses. 

If  you  must  chain  the  dog  up  during  the  day,  then  give  him  his  lib- 
erty at  night.  It  is  not  necessary  to  chain  him  up  if  you  have  a  yard  with 
a  fence  high  enough  and  gate  securely  fastened.  Many  a  bad  boy  will 
delight  to  tease  your  dog  simply  because  he  sees  he  is  chained  up — for  the 
boy  would  be  afraid  to  if  the  dog  was  loose — and  this  teasing  makes  a  cross 
dog.     I  don't  blame  the  dog,  but  I  do  the  boy. 

If  you  have  no  yard  fenced  in  and  a  large  dog  and  must  keep  it  on 
chain  part  of  the  time,  allow  at  least  20  feet  of  chain.  Fancy  the  misery 
of  a  man  full  of  life  and  energy  trying  to  take  exercise  by  pulling  and 
■training  against  a  chain  three  or  four  feet  long.     Yet  this  is  the  length 



246  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING   DOGS. 

which  some  otherwise  humane  people  seem  to  think  a  just  allowance  for 
the  yard  dog.  The  chain  should  be  fastened  to  a  stake  about  18  feet  from 
the  kennel. 

Should  there  be  no  enclosure  for  your  dog  to  romp  in  and  must 
therefore  be  tied  up  to  prevent  loafing,  straying,  or  getting  coaxed  away 
and  stolen,  then  proceed  thus  in  securing  and  still  enable  him  to  move 
about  tolerably  freely:  Get  a  strong  wire,  ten  to  forty  feet  long,  slip  a 
ring  on  it,  fasten  wire  at  each  end  to  stout  stake,  drive  the  stakes  at  full 
stretch  of  wire  into  ground  to  below  the  surface.  Hook  the  dog's  chain 
to  ring  running  freely  on  the  wire,  and  your  dog  can  run  up  and  down 
this  course  at  will.  By  attaching  such  a  wire  to  the  side  of  a  long  wall  or 
house,  a  runway  can  be  provided  in  similar  manner.  The  kennel  can  be 
placed  a  few  feet  beyond  the  end  of  long  wire  so  that  the  dog  can  get  to 
and  into  it  without  needing  to  be  changed. 

Yards  for  Dogs. — If  you  have  a  dog  you  should  also  have  a  yard  fenced 
in.  No  one  living  in  a  city  should  keep  a  dog  unless  they  have  the  yard, 
except  in  a  case  of  a  small  toy  dog,  that  you  keep  in  the  house  or  a  flat, 
and  in  such  cases  you  must  take  your  dog  out  for  a  walk  night  and  morn- 
ing. No  dogs,  even  the  smallest  toy,  can  live  right  and  be  healthy  if 
they  live  indoors  and  on  carpets  all  their  life.  They  must  get  their  feet 
on  mother  earth  and  a  chance  at  grass.  I  pity  any  dog  that'  has  to  live  in 
a  parlor  or  a  bedroom  all  his  life — for  he  is  in  prison,  perhaps  an  elegant 
prison,  but  yet  it  is  a  prison  and  the  dog  is  leading  an  unnatural  life  and 
a  limited  one.  A  friend  of  mine  who  is  worth  many  thousands  of  dollars 
to  my  cents  lives  in  an  elegant  mansion  in  Cincinniti,  surrounded  by  large 
grounds  and  handsome  lawns,  but  to  be  fashionable  and  his  place  to  look 
to  correspond  with  his  fashionable  neighbors,  he  has  no  fence  around  it. 
He  owned  a  very  fine  St.  Bernard  and  a  few  days  ago  the  electric  car  in 
front  of  his  house  killed  his  dog.  Now,  if  he  had  had  a  fence  his  dog  would 
be  living.  Your  neighbor  may  have  a  fine  lawn — and  no  fence — and  your 
dog  has  no  right  to  trespass  on  his  grounds  and  destroy  his  flowers.  This 
neighbor  may  be  one  of  those  unfortunate  persons  who  have  something 
lacking  in  their  general  make-up,  and  does  not  love  dogs  (and  for  this  he 
is  to  be  pitied),  and  your  dog  coming  into  his  yard  and  committing  a 
nuisance  or  damaging  his  flowers  causes  him  to  some  night  "drop  a  but- 
ton" where  your  dog  gets  it  and  then  your  dog  dies.  If  you  had  had  a 
fence  and  kept  your  dog  where  he  belonged,  your  to-be-pitied  neighbor 
(because  he  does  not  love  dogs)  would  not  have  done  so  and  your  dog 
would  still  be  living.  If  you  have  a  fine  lawn  in  front  and  must  keep  up 
the  style  of  the  neighborhood,  then  at  least  do  the  next  best  thing,  viz., 
fence  off  a  good-sized  yard  in  rear  of  your  house  for  the  dog.  This  is 
better  and  safer  than  no  yard  at  all  and  will  do  all  right  if  large  enough, 
but  then  take  the  dog  out  for  a  walk  once  a  day  at  least,  which  will  add 
to  his  health  and  happiness.  Dogs  have  rights,  and  many  of  them,  but 
your  dog  has  no  right  to  become  a  nuisance  to  your  neighbor,  and  he  won't 
if  properly  kept  and  cared  for  on  your  own  premises.  The  fence  should  be 
so  high  that  there  is  no  danger  of  the  dog  jumping  it,  and  your  gates  should 
be  made  self-closing,  as  your  servants  or  a  caller  may  leave  the  gate  open, 
and  in  this  way  your  dog  will  live  and  stay  where  he  belongs  and  has  a 
right  to,  and  can't  trespass  or  get 'himself  or  his  owner  into  trouble. 

I  am  sorry  to  say  that  there  are  some  people  in  this  enlightened  age 
who  do  not  like  dogs.  I  pity  all  such,  and  should  you  contemplate  moving 
into  another  neighborhood,  before  you  close  the  deal  for  the  house  first  find 
out  if  your  neighbors  on  both  sides  love  dogs — if  not,  don't  rent  this  house, 
but  find  one  where  you  will  have  better  neighbors  who  do  love  dogs,  for 
these  you  can  trust  and  the  others  you  could  not.  If  you  are  living  beside 
people  who  do  not  love  dogs — watch  them  closely. 

The  only  safe  plan  in  such  a  case  is  to  get  up  and  take  a  look  all  over 
your  yard  carefully  each  morning  before  you  let  your  dog  out,  for  you 
might  find  a  piece  of  "fixed"  meat  or  a  piece  of  sponge  that  had  been  dipped 
in  grease  which,  if  tae  dog  picked  up  and  swallowed,  would  cause  a  very 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  247 

painful  death.  Also,  be  very  careful  yourself  and  never  throw  a  cork  that 
would   cause  his   death  as  well. 

Always    have   a   collar   on   your   dog,    locked,    and    tight   enough   so    it 
can't  be  slipped  over  his  head,  and  on  it  something  reading  like  this: 

ROVER, 
Owned  by  Jno.  Smith,  220  Main  St.,  Cincinnati. 

So  that  if  he  does  stray  away  the  chances  are  more  in  his  favor  of  being  re- 
turned to  you,  for  he  may  fall  into  the  hands  of  a  man  who  loves  dogs,  and 
therefore  an  honest  man,  who  would  return  him  to  you. 

Yard  Kennels. — If  you  have  a  large  dog  and  prefer  him  to  sleep  in 
your  yard,  provide  a  suitable  and  comfortable  dog  house  for  him,  a  shelter 
and  proper  protection  in  wet  and  cold  weather,  properly  ventilated  at  the 
top,  so  that  he  does  not  sleep  in  a  draught.  The  size  you  can  determine 
easy  enough.  Have  feet  on  it  so  that  it  stands  several  inches  off  the 
ground,  and  make  the  floor  double  with  tar  paper  between  floors.  Small 
wheels  on  it  in  place  of  feet  are  best,  as  this  will  enable  you  to  move 
it  to  different  locations,  so  if  it  is  damp  weather  you  can  place  it  in  a 
part  of  the  yard  that  will  be  dry.  Watch  out  for  dampness,  wUich  causes 
rheumatism.  Cellars  or  basements,  unless  you  are  certain  they  are  not 
damp,  are  a  dangerous  place  for  a  dog  to  sleep.  As  to  bedding — in  hot 
weather  the  bare  floor  is  the  one  the  dog  will  prefer  as  most  comfortable. 
Pine  shavings  are  a  good  bedding  for  medium  weather  in  spring  and  fall,  as 
no  fleas  can  live  in  them.  In  winter  straw  is  the  best,  and  don't  be  stingy 
with  it;  give  him  plenty,  so  he  can  make  a  hole  and  cuddle  up  in  it  and  keep 
warm.     This  should  be  changed  at  least  three  times  a  week. 

Dogs  Barking  or  Howling. — Your  dog  has,  however,  no  right  to  bark 
or  howl  at  night  and  annoy  your  neighbors — unless  he  is  barking  at  some 
intruder  and  notifying  you  of  danger.  If  he  gets  into  the  habit  of  barking 
at  night  he  must  be  broken  of  this,  which  can  be  done,  and  in  a  night  or 
two.  Slip  quickly  and  quietly  to  his  kennel,  catch  him  in  the  act,  have 
your  whip  handy,  and  give  him  a  whipping  for  barking — scold  him  and 
tell  him  he  must  keep  quiet.     He'll  soon  understand  what  you  mean. 

A  dog  has  certain  inalienable  rights,  among  which  are  those  of  life, 
liberty  and  the  pursuit  of  happiness,  subject,  however,  as  the  rights  of  hu- 
man beings  are,  to  the  exercise  of  liberty  without  derogation  to  the  com- 
fort of  others. 

Dogs  in  Your  House. — If  you  have  only  one  or  two  dogs,  your  own 
house  is  none  too  good  or  suitable  a  place  for  them  to  sleep  at  night,  and 
their  access  to  the  house  during  the  day  is  all  right,  for  a  thoroughly  well 
behaved  dog  is  a  most  desirable  companion  to  have  around  for  company, 
and  especially  at  night,  for  any  dog  is  liable  to  prove  of  great  value  or 
assistance  in  case  of  burglars  or  unwelcome  visitors.  This  applies  to  the 
large  breeds  as  well  as  toy  dogs,  for  they  would  all  be  watchful  and  give 
the  alarm  to  prevent  harm  befalling  their  master  and  mistress.  All  dogs 
are  faithful  to  some  one.  How  often  do  we  read  or  hear  of  lives  having 
been  saved  by  the  house  dog. 

If  you  have  a  toy  dog  that  sleeps  in  the  house,  provide  it  a  box  or 
basket  so  that  in  cold  weather  you  can  cover  it  up  at  night.  Putting  it  to 
sleep  on  a  chair  or  soft  does  well  enough  in  summer,  but  suppose  you  do 
this  in  winter,  and  you  cover  it  up  with  a  shawl  and  it  goes  to  sleep — say 
in  a  warm  room,  this  is  all  right,  so  far.  Now  suppose  the  fire  goes 
out  towards  morning,  your  pet  turns  over  and  "kicks  the  cover  off,"  the 
room  gets  cold,  and  the  result  is  that  your  dog  catches  cold,  which,  if  not 
attended  to  promptly,  is  liable  to  be  a  sick  dog.  Provide  a  box  or  basket 
so  that  you  can  cover  it  over  the  top,  allowing  for  air,  and  he  will  be  safer 
and  more  comfortable.  Aside  from  this,  he  is  more  liable  to  be  clean  in 
his  habits,  and  will  wait  till  he  is  let  out  into  the  yard  in  the  morning.  Very 
few  dogs  will  commit  a  nuisance  in  their  sleeping  box. 

And  again — suppose  he  is  unlucky  enough  to  get  fleas  on  him,  and  this 
often  happens  to  a  dog  by  having  met  a  dog  that  did  have  them,  you  will 


248  USEFUL   INFORMATION   REGARDING  DOGS. 

find  It  much  easier  to  rid  him  of  them  than  if  he  had  been  sleeping  on  a 
sola  or  loose  in  the  house,  for  you  could  take  his  bedding  out  and  clean  or 
burn  it.     To  get  rid  of  fleas  is  given  under  that  heading. 

-  House-Breaking  Puppies. — When  you  buy  a  puppy  and  get  it  home, 
don't  expect  it  to  be  house-broken,  and  you'll  not  be  disappointed.  It's  too 
young  to  know  just  what  it  ought  to  do,  and  you  must  give  it  time,  a  chance, 
and  properly  educate  it  yourself.  Thi3  can  be  done  with  every  puppy,  or 
grown  dog  either,  but  you  can't  do  it  in  a  few  hours,  for  it  requires  time 
and    patience. 

You  may  have  bought  it  as  "house-broke,"  and  it  may  be  that  it  was 
— for  the  home  it  has  just  left — but  needs  re-breaking  to  a  certain  extent 
for  its  new  home,  which  will  then  not  be  nearly  so  hard  to  accomplish. 

Now,  when  your  puppy  makes  a  mistake,  if  it  is  old  enough  to 
punish,  eateh  it  in  the  act;  rub  his  nose  in  it,  switch  it,  and  run  it  out  in 
the  yard,  weather  permitting  (for  you  wouldn't,  of  course,  put  it  out  in 
the  rain  or  snow).  Repeat  this  every  time  it  does  wrong,  and  it  can  soon 
be  taught  to  be  clean  in  its  habits.  Never  punish  any  puppy  (or  dog)  ex- 
cept at  the  time  of  the  wrong-doing,  so  that  it  knows  wnat  it  is  being 
punished  for.  By  running  it  out  of  doors  every  time,  it  soon  gets  to  un- 
derstand that  there  is  the  place  to  attend  to  nature's  calls.  Have  pa- 
tience, and  it  won't  be  very  long  till  you  have  a  well  behaved  dog.  Some  are 
much  easier  to  break  than  others.  I  don't  advocate  too  much  or  severe 
whipping,  as  in  some  cases  it  will  cow  the  dog,  and  if  so  will  take  a 
long  time  to  get  it  over  this.  Most  pupies  at  two  months  old  will  under- 
stand that  they  have  done  wrong  by  the  punishment.  As  it  gets  older 
make  it  a  point  to  put  it  out  the  last  thing  at  night  and  the  first  thing 
in  the  morning,  and  give  it  frequent  yard  opporunities  during  the  day. 
Use  judgment  and  forbearance  as  well,  and  reason  with  and  talk  to  it — 
they  soon  get  to  understand.  If  weather  is  bad,  at  night  or  in  the  morning, 
for  that  time  put  it  in  the  cellar  or  some  covered  outhouse  or  shed. 

If  you  have  a  female  and  raise  a  litter  of  puppies  at  home,  here  is  a 
good  plan  that  I  follow  in  the  kennel,  and  when  I  sell  a  puppy  two  or 
three  months  old,  it  is  already  "kennel  broken,"  and  then  very  easy  to 
house-break  when  its  owner  gets  it  home.  I  have  stalls  made,  enclosed  by 
a  gate  and  in  front  of  the  box  or  part  of  the  stall  fitted  up  for  the  bitch  to 
whelp  in,  I  have  a  galvanized  iron  pan  to  fit  the  other  part  of  the  stall,  and 
this  pan  I  cover  over  the  bottom  with  sawdust  for  the  puppies  to  go  into 
as  soon  as  they  are  old  enough.  The  mother  cleans  up  alter  her  puppies 
till  they  are  four  or  five  weeks  old,  and  then  they  will  naturally  and  very 
quickly  get  into  the  habit  of  going  into  the  sawdust  when  nature  prompts 
them.  The  example  set  by  the  first  one  to  go  in  will  soon  be  followed  by 
its  brothers  and  sisters,  as  it  is  a  dog's  natural  inclination  to  hunt  a  place. 
You  can  follow  this  plan  when  your  bitch  has  puppies  by  simply  making 
a  low  wooden  box  with  a  sheet  of  tin  for  a  bottom  to  it,  which  will  answer 
for  one  litter  all  right  enough,  and  if  your  bitch  has  whelped  in  a  box  in 
your  house,  you  can  fix  up  a  little  fence  made  out  of  lathes  that  will  cost  but 
a  trifle,  and  answer  the  purpose  of  keeping  her  and  her  puppies  penned 
up.  Puppies  that  I  sell  as  "kennel  broke"  are  very  easy  to  house-break. 
Treat  all  your  puppies  for  worms  soon  after  they  are  weaned,  as  then  the 
worms  begin  to  be  dangerous.  In  some  cases  as  young  as  five  and  six  weeks  is 
necessary.  Worms  kill  more  dogs  than  all  other  diseases  combined;  but  this 
you  will  find  carefully  treated  and  remedies  given  under  the  heading  of 
"Worms"  in  another  part  of  this  book.  To  house-break  older  dogs,  follow 
the  same  plan,  only  a  little  more  severe. 

Shade  in  Kennel  Yards. — Fortunate  are  the  dogs  in  a  kennel  during 
torrid  weather,  if  well  provided  with  shade  trees.  Nothing  would  appear  to 
please  a  dog,  especially  a  terrier,  so  much  on  a  hot  day,  as  to  burrow  into  the 
cool  earth.  If  this  can  be  allowed  without  damage  to  property  by  all  means 
let  the  dogs  make  their  own  cool  earth  nests.  If  appropriate  shade  is  not  af- 
forded naturally  it  is  well  to  build  a  lean-to  or  a  square,  flat,  shed-like 
structure,  as  low  to  the  ground  as  the  height  of  the  dogs  will  allow.  They 
shquld  be  able  to  stand  up  under  it.    This  will  throw  a  shady  spot  at  all 


DOG DOM 


Is  the  leading  monthly  kennel  publication  In  America.  A  free  sample 
copy  will  convince  you  of  this  fact.  All  breeds  are  treated  alike  so 
if  you  are  interested  in  dogs  you  should  not  be  without  DOGDOM. 
Established  in  1900,  there  has  been  a  steady  growth  until  now  there 
are  more  than  THIRTY  THOUSAND  READERS  each  month. 

Such  well  known  authorities  as  Freeman  Lloyd,  A.  F.  Hochwalt, 
Dr.  O.  P.  Bennett,  Bert  Franklin,  D.  V.  M.,  Laurence  Tobin,  Edward 
Axtell  and  Dr.  F.  A.  Fisher  write  for  DOGDOM.  The  Question  Box, 
in  which  you  may  have  answered  any  questions  as  to  breeding,  dis- 
eases, etc.,  free  of  charge,  is  alone  worth  more  than  the  subscription 
price. 

The  Christmas  Supplement  to  DOGDOM  is  given  free  to  subscrib- 
ers with  the  regular  December  issue.  This  edition  is  printed  on  the 
highest  grade,  plate  paper,  and  contains  reviews  of  the  finest  dogs 
and  kennels  in  the  world. 

$1.00  A  YEAR  CANADIAN  AND  FOREIGN,  $1.25 

SAMPLE  COPIES  FREE 

As  an  advertising  medium  DOGDOM  Is  without  a  peer.  The 
amount  of  display  and  classified  advertising  carried  each  month  ex- 
ceeds that  of  any  other  dog  paper.  If  you  have  a  dog  to  sell  or  to 
offer  at  stud  send  at  once  for  a  DOGDOM  rate  card.  The  price  may  be 
higher,  but  the  results  will  more  than  warrant  any  extra  expenditure. 
It  will  prove  the  cheapest  advertising  in  the  long  run. 

DOGDOM  can  supply  any  book  about  dogs  published.  Send  for 
list. 


DOGDO 

F.  E.  BECHMANN,  PUBLISHER 
BATTLE  CREEK,  MICHIGAN. 


250  USEFUL  INFORMATION   REGARDING   DOGS. 

times  of  the  day  and  if  a  trench  is  dug  in  the  earth  on  a  line  with  the  edges 
of  the  roof  a  dry  spot  for  the  dogs  to  lie  in  when  it  rains  or  the  ground 
is  wet  will  be  afforded. 

Guide  as  to  Proper  Size  Doses  of  Medicine  for  Dogs. — In  many  cases 
your  druggist  or  family  physician  would  know  what  remedy  to  prescribe  for 
your  dog,  but  would  not  know  how  much  of  the  medicine  to  give  a  dog. 

Let  them  be  guided  by  the  following:  A  proper  sized  dose  of  medicine 
for  the  largest  breeds  of  dogs  may  be  given  the  same  as  if  for  a  man.  We 
will  take  the  St.  Bernard,  Great  Dane,  or  Mastiff,  as  requiring  a  dose  we 
will  call  one  part;  middle  sized  dogs  like  a  setter  or  pointer  can  be  given 
from  a  half  to  three-quarters  as  much  as  a  St.  Bernard,  while  a  dog  like  a 
fox  terrier,  a  third;  a  dog  the  size  of  a  pug,  a  quarter;  and  smaller  toy  dogs, 
from  one-eighth  to  a  twelfth  part. 

In  regard  to  age:  the  matured  dog,  one  part;  a  year  old,  three-quarters; 
six  to  nine  months,  half;  and  at  four  to  six  weeks,  one-eighth.  This  is 
Dalziel's  idea,  and  he  is  the  first  one  to  furnish  a  guide  that  I  know  of.  I 
have  had  doctors  bring  their  dogs  to  me  to  treat,  and  tell  me  that  they 
really  did  not  know  how  much  to  give  the  dog  of  the  remedy  that  they 
knew  was  required  in  the  case. 

Preparing  for  Shows. — The  preparation  of  dogs  for  shows  is  a  matter 
upon  which  we  are  often  asked  for  advice,  and  in  view  of  the  season  which 
will  soon  be  here  for  fall  and  winter  shows  a  few  lines  will  perhaps  be 
appreciated.  The  most  notable  feature  of  the  inquiries  made  about  this 
subject  lies  in  the  obvious  fact  that  the  aspirants  to  exhibition  fame  do  not 
realize  the  necessity  for  preparation  until  the  time  has  gone  by  for  doing 
any  real  good;  then  at  the  eleventh  hour  there  is  wild  excitement  about 
matters  that  ought  to  have  been  foreseen  and  arranged  weeks,  perhaps 
months — earlier.  A  dog  needs  to  be  put  through  some  sort  of  training  course 
just  as  an  athlete  does;  and  unless  he  is  initiated  into  the  proper  methods 
of  deportment  he  is  not  likely  to  find  favor  in  the  eyes  of  the  judges,  re- 
porters or  public.  To  some  extent  a  dog  intended  for  exhibition  is  public 
property,  and  the  public  who  pay  to  come  and  see  him  ought  to  have  him 
exhibited  to  them  in  the  best  condition  and  with  the  best  manners  possible, 
says  Our  Dogs. 

How  can  a  dog  be  taught  to  look  his  best?  Well,  chiefly  by  being  kept 
in  good  conditions  by  careful  dieting,  and  particularly  by  regular  exercise. 
Keep  his  blood  flowing  freely  through  his  veins — keep  him  alert — ready  for 
his  meals,  well-groomed  and  well  amused — for  dogs  like  amusement  as  much 
as  their  masters  do.  Do  not  let  him  get  into  "slack"  ways — keep  him  "up 
to  the  mark."  These  methods,  and  some  occasional  exercise  in  the  manoeu- 
vres of  the  show  ring,  will  have  an  excellent  effect.  Rehearse,  rehearse! 
There  is  nothing  like  plenty  of  rehearsal  to  make  a  show  run  smoothly.  Now, 
what  about  being  "proof  against  distemper?"  Is  not  that  a  large  order  to 
execute  all  at  once?  Who  is  going  to  make  a  dog  proof  against  the  great 
Fiend  that  waylays  the  race  of  dogs.  Several  things  may  be  done.  It  can  be 
ascertained  probably  whether  he  has  had  distemper.  There  is  no  surety  that 
he  will  not  have  it  again,  but  it  is  a  safeguard — experience  showing  that  it 
is  the  exception  for  a  dog  to  contract  the  disease  a  second  time — though 
many  dogs  do. 

Then,  bearing  in  mind  that  contagious  diseases  always  need  a  receptive 
condition  on  the  part  of  their  victim,  we  should  always  take  care  that  a  dog 
is  never  sent  to  a  show  if  he  seems  at  all  "below  par"  or  run  down.  Give  him 
beforehand  some  cooling  medicine  and  plenty  of  exercise.  One  of  the  great- 
est destroyers  of  disease  germs  is  oxygen — aerate  his  blood  therefore  with 
plenty  of  ozone — he  will  be  less  likely  to  contract  disease.  Disinfectants  are 
not  of  much  value  applied  to  the  coat;  we  should  trust  more  to  the  general 
condition  of  health  and  to  a  thorough  disinfection  on  returning  from  the 
show.  No  dog  with  a  cold  or  discharge  from  the  nostrils  or  running  at  the 
eyes  ought  to  be  sent  to  a  show;  at  a  good  show  no  doubt  such  a  condition 
would  be  noticed  at  the  veterinary  examination  and  the  dog  would  at  once 
be  refused  admission.    Stringent  rules  are  very  necessary  at  big  shows,  and  it 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  251 

is  not  always  possible  to  enforce  stringent  rules  without  injuring  some  sus- 
ceptibilities. 

The  first  three  points  surely  do  not  need  much  explanation — but  they  do 
need  emphasis.  Dogs  intended  for  show  must  be  so  fed  and  groomed  that 
they  are  in  full  condition  of  health,  but  not  gross;  and  their  skins  are  free 
from — we  will  not  say  mange,  which  is  a  product  of  filth,  but  from  eczema, 
a  blood  irritation  affecting  the  skin;  that  they  are  constantly  well-groomed 
fo  keep  their  coats  in  proper  order,  there  is  not  anything  as  good  for  a 
dog's  coat  as  regular  grooming;  that  have  no  trace  of  worms.  Worms  must 
be  sought  after  from  a  month  to  six  weeks  before  the  show  comes  on;  the 
more  or  less  drastic  treatment  necessary  to  dispossess  them  will  naturally 
reduce  the  animal  to  a  condition  not  up  to  show  standard;  and  as  one  dose 
is  never  enough  (really)  to  free  a  dog  from  worms  it  is  well  to  begin  in  time. 
Let  him  have  one  or  two  or  three  good  dosings,  well  in  advance  of  the  show- 
time, and  then  all  that  should  be  needed  afterward  is  an  occasional  mild 
aperient  pill  or  capsule  just  to  keep  the  pests  from  getting  a  lodgement  again. 

Age  of  Maturity. — The  larger  breeds  of  dogs,  like  St.  Bernards,  Mastiffs, 
Great  Danes,  or  Newfoundlands,  do  not  mature  until  two  years  of  age; 
setters  and  pointers  at  twelve  to  fifteen  months,  while  fox  terriers  and  dogs 
of  this  size,  and  including  smaller  breeds,  will,  as  a  rule,  mature  at  a  vear 
old. 

Determining  Age  of  Dogs. — Many  novices  will  appreciate  a  few  lines 
upon  the  subject  of  how  to  determine  the  age  of  a  dog.  Fortunately, 
there  is  not  the  amount  of  roguery  in  the  canine  fancy  as  there  is  in 
"horsey"  circles,  but  now  and  again  no  doubt  the  amateur  gets  "bitten." 
To  a  certain  extent  the  age  can  be  determined  by  examining  the  teeth. 
A  dog  of  mature  age  has  forty-two  teeth,  and  these  are  complete  in  num- 
ber at  the  age  of  about  eight  months.  This  clearly  indicates  the  age 
so  far,  but  after  that  there  is  no  method  so  certain,  and  a  good  deal  of 
judgment  is  needed.  As  a  rule  the  teeth  of  an  old  dog  will  be  dark  and 
lacking  in  the  pearly  look  of  a  young  animal's  teeth — but  even  this  must 
not  be  too  much  relied  upon,  as  cunning  dog  dealers  take  care  to  use  a 
tooth  brush  freely  if  such  be  necessary,  and,  moreover,  dogs'  teeth  vary 
a  great  deal,  as  ours  do. 

Generally  speaking,  the  age  of  a  dog  can  best  be  adjudged  by  a  combi- 
nation of  appearances.  Old  dogs  are  quiet  and  stolid,  whereas  youth  car- 
ries activity  with  it.  Moreover,  curious  as  it  may  sound,  grey  hairs  will 
tell  a  tale  in  dogs  as  well  as  in  our  own  case,  for  it  is  often  noticeable  that 
a  dog  has  become  gray  in  the  face  and  about  the  ears.  So  we  have  several 
points  to  judge  by,  i.  e.,  appearance  of  coat  as  regards  greyness;  general 
demeanor;  condition  of  teeth.  To  these  may  be  added  the  state  of  the 
claws,  which  in  some  breeds  are  curled  round  and  often  disposed  to  be 
sore  and  festering.  Finally,  we  may  suggest  as  good  advice  that  the 
opinion  of  an  expert  be  taken  in  any  case  of  doubt.  The  novice  should 
never  purchase  a  dog  at  a  show  or  upon  any  such  sudden  inspiration  with- 
out being  guided  by  a  competent  adviser. 

Treatment  of  Field  Dogs. — During  the  season  when  sportsmen  pass 
bench  shows  and  put  their  dogs  in  trim  for  the  pursuit  of  Bob  White, 
sporting  dogs  need  to  be  dealt  with  at  this  season,  because  there  are  cer- 
tain ailments  which  affect  them  in  a  greater  degree  than  other  clogs;  and 
a  knowledge  of  how  to  properly  treat  cases  of  sickness  among  field  dogs 
is,  of  course,  very  essential,  unless  they  are  to  be  entirely  incapacitated. 

In  the  first  place,  it  is  most  essential  that  when  a  dog  has  been  at 
work  in  the  field  he  shall  be  attended  to  at  once  on  his  return  home  at 
night.  The  dog  should  be  thoroughly  groomed;  if  wet  let  him  be  rubbed 
dry  with  a  rough  towel.  So  many  careless  gamekeepers  allow  dogs  to 
come  in  wet  from  the  field  and  send  them  to  kennel  without  any  attention 
■ — the  result  is  that  they  get  either  rheumatic  or  asthmatical.  Another 
important  thing  is  to  examine  the  feet  and  ears  with  a  view  to  the  removal 
of  all  thorns  and  other  foreign  substances  which  are  likely  to  set  up  in- 
flammation, and  then  will  incapacitate  the  animal  for  some  days  at  least. 
It  it  should  be  found  on  examination  that  the  feet  are  sore  and  inflamed, 


252  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

they  should  be  bathed  in  tepid  water,  and  afterward  with  advantage  may 
be  sprinkled  with  powdered  Fuller's  earth,  which  is  very  absorbent  and 
cooling  as  wejl. 

As  we  said  above,  rheumatism  is  another  common  ailment  affecting 
dogs  which  have  been  neglected  after  exposure  to  bad  weather.  Rheu- 
matism occurs  either  in  the  hindquarters  or  in  the  front  limbs,  and  when 
it  takes  the  latter  form  it  is  known  as  "kennel  lameness."  This  again  is 
an  ailment  which  will  recur  from  time  to  time  under  unfavorable  condi- 
tions. It  can  best  be  dealt  with  by  the  use  of  a  good  strong  liniment  or 
embrocation — such,  for  instance,  as  a  mixture  of  equal  parts  of  turpentine 
and  soap  liniment,  which  is  very  searching,  especially  if  a  little  hartshorn 
be  added.  The  dog  should  also  have  some  internal  medicine,  and  the  most 
effective  remedy  for  rheumatic  troubles  is  salicylate  of  soda.  The  dog 
must  also  be  carefully  dieted,  care  being  taken  not  to  overfeed  him  during 
the  prevalence  of  the  attack.  In  this  case,  again,  it  is  to  be  borne  in 
mind  that  one  attack  is  likely  to  be  followed  by  others  upon  the  least  pro- 
vocation, and  special  care  should  therefore  be  given  to  deal  with  a  trouble  as 
soon  as  it  appears.      (See  article  on  Rheumatism). 

Dogs  in  the  field  are  liable  now  and  again  to  take  up  poisoned  meat, 
which,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  it  is  contrary  to  the  law  of  the  land  to 
•  place  it  about,  is  very  often  laid  about  with  the  object  of  destroying  rats.  A 
dog  should  never  be  allowed  to  eat  meat  or  anything  of  that  kind  that 
he  picks  up  in  the  field  if  he  can  possibly  be  prevented  from  doing  so. 
The  commonest  poison  likely  to  be  picked  up  in  this  way  are  arsenic  and 
strychnine.  It  is  impossible  to  mistake  a  case  of  strychnine  poisoning,  be- 
cause the  victim  has  twitchings  and  the  limbs  are  drawn  up;  in  the  case 
of  arsenic  there  is  vomiting,  swelling  of  the  tongue,  and  great  pain  espe- 
cially noticeable  if  the  hand  be  placed  on  the  belly.  The  best  thing  to  do 
in  any  case  is  to  administer  an  emetic.  Mustard  and  water  is  the  like- 
liest thing,  and  that  can  be  followed  in  the  case  of  arsenic  by  a  dose  of 
powdered  magnesia,  or,  in  the  case  of  strychnine,  by  giving  a  quantity  of 
fat. 

Rearing  Winter  Puppies. — Puppies  born  during  the  late  autumn  and 
winter  months  are  more  trouble  to  rear  than  those  whelped  in  the  spring 
or  summer.  The  changeable  weather  which  is  experienced  in  most  parts 
tends  to  check  their  growth  and  make  them  more  prone  to  develop  disease 
than  under  more  favorable  circumstances.  Could  weeks  of  hard,  dry  frost 
be  insured,  then  the  rearing  of  puppies  would  be  an  easy  matter,  even  to 
the  novice,  for  however  delicate  the  breed,  it  is  rarely  they  will  not  thrive 
under  such  invigorating  conditions  as  the  sharp,  crisp  air  of  a  bright  frosty 
day  which  is  occasionally  experienced  in  mid-winter.  Puppies,  like  all  ani- 
mals and  vegetable  creation,  will  expand  to  the  sun's  rays,  cold  though  the 
air  may  be,  and  feel  it  is  a  joy  to  live. 

But  even  under  the  most  unfavorable  conditions,  such  as  were  ex- 
perienced during  November  and  December  of  last  year,  it  is  quite  possible 
to  rear  a  large  majority  of  the  puppies,  provided  common  sense  is  brought 
to  bear  and  the  dam  is  well  nurtured  and  nourished  before  and  after 
whelping.  For  the  first  few  weeks  of  their  existence  the  puppies  them- 
selves require  little  attention  beyond  seeting  that  they  all,  as  far  as  possible, 
get  the  same  amount  of  food,  e.  g.,  that  the  stronger  do  not  push  the  weaker 
away  from  the  dam.  When  the  latter  is  the  case,  if  the  puppies  are  val- 
uable, it  is  advisable  to  have  a  good  foster  mother  to  assist  in  rearing  the 
weaker. 

One  cause  of  failure  in  the  rearing  of  autumn  and  winter  puppies  is 
that  they  are  pampered  too  much,  even  very  often  in  the  case  of  the  larger 
and  hardy  breeds,  such  as  St.  Bernards,  Retrievers,  etc.  There  is  a  suc- 
cession of  rainy  days,  the  ground  becomes  wet  and  sodden,  consequently 
the  puppies  are  shut  up  in  a  kennel  run,  an  outhouse,  stable,  barn,  or 
what-not,  where  very  little  light  or  air  can  reach  them,  with  the  result 
that  they  all  lie  huddled  up  together  for  warmth,  there  being  very  little 
natural  warmth  in  their  poor  little  bodies;  they  are  miserable  and  too 
dejected  to  play  and  romp  about.    The  dam,  in  her  mistaken  kindness,  en- 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  263 

courages  them  in  this  lethargic  state,  because  the  door  is  kept  fast  closed 
against  her,  and  she  cannot  have  her  liberty  when  and  how  she  pleases. 

Even  when  the  rain  ceases  and  for  a  few  hours  the  elements  are  pro- 
pitious, advantage  is  not  taken  of  the  smile  of  the  gods  that  be,  and  be- 
cause the  ground  is  wet  and  cold  it  is  thought  these  poor  little  shivering 
puppies  must  not  run  out  and  get  their  little  (or  big)  paws  wet,  they 
must  still  be  kept  in  till  the  ground  has,  at  least,  some  semblance  of  dry- 
ness. Now,  if  advantage  were  taken  of  every  bit  of  dry  weather  and  the 
puppies  allowed  a  run  out  to  exercise,  even  if  only  for  half  an  hour,  they 
would  return  to  their  kennel  refreshed,  their  blood  would  course  through 
their  veins  more  naturally,  they  would  play  and  scramble  about  and  eat 
their  food  with  added  zest. 

When  the  sun,  however,  puts  forth  his  rays,  if  the  puppies  had  some 
straw,  coarse  shavings,  or  dry  bracken  (which  is  often  obtainable  in  the 
country)  laid  down  in  a  corner  of  a  yard  or  garden,  they  could  be  left 
there  for  several  hours,  or  at  least  during  the  warmest  part  of  the  day, 
say  from  11:30  to  2:30,  and  if  a  few  big  bones  were  given  them  they 
would  keep  on  the  move  and  there  need  be  no  fear  of  colds.  Light  and 
air  are  absolutely  necessary  to  all  creation,  and  puppies,  like  men,  cannot 
thrive  without  either;  therefore  if  they  are  to  be  successfully  reared  at  all 
times  of  the  year  they  must  have  a  plentiful  supply  of  both,  which  form 
as  large  a  part  of  their  well-being  as  food. 

Dogs  Barking  at  People  Passing. — Here  is  another  very  bad  habit  that 
dogs  get  into — generally  their  owner's  fault,  and  not  the  dog's,  because 
if  when  the  dog  first  began  this  it  had  been  then  corrected,  this  bad  habit 
would  have  been  checked.  Don't  allow  your  dog  to  run  out  and  bark  at 
any  person  or  vehicle  passing.  When  it  does  so,  get  your  whip  and  give 
the  dog — caught  in  the  act — a  whipping,  and  you  can  soon  break  him  of  it. 
Aside  from  the  annoyance  to  people  it  is  dangerous  for  your  dog,  as  in 
running  and  barking  at  a  team  he  is  liable  to  get  in  front  and  get  run 
over,  hurt  or  killed.     Dogs  must  be  made  to  behave,  as  all  dogs  should  do. 

Fighting  Dogs. J — I  am  a  lover  of  any  and  all  kinds  of  Sport — that  is 
legitimate  and  not  cruel.  If  two  men  want  to  fight — all  right — they  know 
just  what  they  are  doing,  and  what  to  expect,  and  the  one  that  gets  licked 
can  stop  when  he  has  to — and  be  "counted  out."  I  draw  the  line  of  sport  at 
dog  fighting,  a  brutal  sport  (?)  it  is,  and  the  man  who  will  allow  his 
dog  to  fight  is,  just  not  a  man,  and  not  near  as  good  as  the  commonest  cur 
dog  that  ekes  out  a  miserable  existence — a  to  be  pitied — homeless  and 
friendless  wanderer  on  the  streets.  I  breed  Bull  Terriers,  that  would 
rather  fight  than  eat,  if  they  had  been  starved  a  month,  but  never  are 
they  allowed  to  fight  if  I  can  prevent  it,  and  I  generally  can.  I  decline  to 
sell — if  I  know  dog  is  to  be  used  for  fighting,  as  I  would  not  knowingly 
sell  a  dog  for  this  purpose  for  a  thousand  dollars.  I  take  this  oppor- 
tunity right  here  to  advise  any  one  who  wants  a  fighting  dog  to  save  their 
postage  stamps  and  not  write  to  me  for  a  bull  terrier  if  they  want  it  for 
fighting  purposes.  Pure  bred  bull  terriers  are  seldom  used  for  this  pur- 
pose, however,  as  the  persons  who  want  "pit  dogs"  are  the  kind  that  are 
not  willing  to  pay  for  a  genuine  and  well  bred  specimen.  The  mixed  breeds 
used  for  this  are  commonly  called  "Bull  Dogs,"  a  misnomer,  as  a  genuine 
bull  dog  is  never  a  fighting  dog. 


254  USEFUL   INFORMATION   REGARDING  DOGS. 


THE  TEETH  OF  THE  DOG 


The  dog,  like  all  other  animals  that  give  suck  to  their  offspring,  has  two 
sets  of  teeth,  the  first  or  milk  or  deciduous  teeth,  and  the  second  or  per- 
manent teeth,  says  a  writer  in  Field  and  Fancy.  The  first  set  of  teeth  are 
shed  about  three  and  a-half  to  five  or  six  .months  in  the  larger  breed  of 
dogs,  and  from  five  to  seven  months  in  the  smaller  or  Toy  breeds.  Fre- 
quently Toy  dogs  have  a  good  deal  of  trouble  in  shedding  their  teeth,  and 
some,  such  as  the  canines  or  tushes,  are  often  never  shed  at  all,  thus 
leaving  the  dog  with  two  sets  of  tushes,  the  first  being  placed  behind  the 

second. 

The  number  of  teeth  varies  according  to  the  class  of  dog.  The  typical 
number  of  permanent  teeth  is  forty-two.  As  a  rule,  if  there  should  be  any 
variation,  they  are  excess  in  those  clogs  having  long  jaws,  and  are  fewer  in 
the  short-faced  dogs,  such  as  Bulldogs,  Pugs,  Griffons,  Toy  Spaniels,  etc.  In 
the  longer-faced  dogs  there  may  be  as  many  as  forty-four,  while  the  short- 
faced  dogs  may  have  as  few  as  twenty-eight,  and  rarely  more  than  thirty- 
eight.     In  the  hairless  dogs  they  are  usually  even  fewer  still. 

When  the  young  puppy  cuts  his  first  teeth  it  does  not  cause  any  trou- 
ble, but  it  is  the  opposite  when  it  sheds  the  first  and  cuts  the  second  teeth. 
It  is  a  critical  time  with  him,  and  predisposes  him  to  take  various  diseases, 
such  as  fits,  skin  diseases,  distemper,  etc.  In  case  the  first  teeth  are  not 
shed,  so  as  to  prevent  the  shooting  up  of  the  second  teeth,  it  may  be  ne- 
cessary to  extract  them.  When  the  temporary  tushes  are  not  shed  and  the 
second  or  permanent  ones  are  up  in  front  of  them,  the  former  should  be 
extracted  carefully,  so  that  they  are  not  broken  and  the  roots  in  consequence 
left  in  the  jaw. 

Between  the  ages  of  four  and  seven  months  Toy  dogs  should  have  their 
mouths  frequently  examined  in  order  to  discover  if  the  second  teeth  are 
coming  up  properly  and  the  temporary  ones  being  shed  in  due  order.  If 
this  is  not  watched  an  ugly  mouth  may  result.  To  assist  the  falling  of 
the  first  teeth  and  the  regulation  of  the  new  or  second  teeth,  young  puppies 
should  have  large,  uneven,  raw  bones  given  them  to  gnaw  and  tear  at. 

The  earliest  disease  of  the  teeth  is  erosion  of  the  enamel,  which  causes 
the  teeth  to  have  a  worm-eaten  or  cankered  appearance.  It  is  usually 
considered  as  a  guide  that  the  dog  has  had  distemper  either  just  before 
or  at  the  time  or  after  the  second  teeth  have  appeared.  Although  it  may 
be  taken  that  the  dog  has  had  distemper  if  this  appearance  of  the  teeth  is 
present,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  dog  will  not  have  another  or  future 
attack  of  this  disease,  as  cases  are  encountered  with  this  appearance  in 
second  attacks  of  distemper.  When  the  enamel  of  the  teeth  is  eaten  into, 
no  treatment  is  of  any  use  to  restore  the  teeth  to  their  proper  appearance. 

The  commonest  disease  of  the  teeth  is  a  collection  of  tartar  just  around 
the  neck  of  the  tooth  just  above  the  gum,  and  which  may  after  some  time 
insinuate  itself  between  the  gum  and  most  of  the  tooth,  and  set  up  in- 
flammation of  the  tooth  socket,  and  in  consequence  loosen  the  tooth.  Fre- 
quently the  material  encases  the  whole  of  the  tooth,  which  looks  blackish, 
greenish,  yellowish  or  brownish  in  color,  often  giving  off  a  repulsive  odor 
when  the  animal  is  suffering  from  some  ailment.  It  is  due  to  microbes  set- 
tling on  the  teeth  and  manufacturing  a  calcereous  material  out  of  the 
saliva  and  debris  of  food  collecting  on  the  teeth.  It  originates  in  conse- 
quence of  the  animal  being  deprived  of  tearing  food,  such  as  lumps  of  raw 
meat  on  a  bone.  Dry  bones  or  hard  biscuits  do  not  supply  the  absence  of 
this  tearing  food.     The  dog's  teeth  by  nature  are  intended  for  biting  and 


THE    REAL   DOG  PAPER 

THE  ACKNOWLEDGED  LEADER  IN  THE 
KENNEL    WORLD 

AMERICAN  FANCIER 

AND  STOCK-KEEPER 

DEVOTED  EXCLDSIVELY  TO  DOGS 

NOW  IN  ITS  58th  VOLUME 

PUBLISHED  WEEKLY 

$2.00  PER  YEAR 

CLASSIFIED  ADS— 1  cent  per  word 

DISPLAY  ADS— per  inch— $1.00  per  week— $3.00  per  month 

KENNEL  RECEIPT  BOOKS-50  Cents 


UP  TO  DATE  IN  EVERY  WAY 


AMERICAN    FANCIER 

36  Broomfield  Street  Boston,  Mass. 


256  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

tearing  much  more  than  crushing.  Nearly  all  pet  dogs  living  In  towns 
as  they  approach  old  age  suffer  from  this  collection  of  tartar,  whereas 
those  dogs  who  live  in  the  country  and  are  used  for  sporting  purposes, 
shepherding,  watching,  etc.,  are  almost,  if  not  always,  free  from  it.  Again, 
if  the  dog  does  not  use  his  teeth  for  chewing,  the  salivary  glands  in  the 
mouth  are  limited  or  put  out  of  action  and  in  consequence  proper  digestion 
does  not  take  place,  the  chemistry  of  the  mouth  is  upset,  the  secretions 
form  a  suitable  pabulum  for  microbes  to  act  upon  and  manufacture  tartar. 

Therefore,  from  what  has  been  said  above,  if  one  wishes  to  prevent 
the  formation  of  tartar,  one  must  feed  a  dog  on  tearing  food  that  gives  the 
mouth  and  teeth  work  to  do.  If  this  precaution  be  neglected  and  tartar 
should  form,  it  ought  to  be  removed  by  scraping  off  and  brushing  the  teeth 
with  some  suitable  wash,  or  powder,  or  soap,  daily  after  food.  When 
the  mouth  gives  off  a  bad  odor,  five  to  ten  drops  of  dilute  hydrochloric  acid 
should  be  given  with  the  food  daily  as  it  assists  digestion  and  rectifies  the 
faulty  secretions. 

The  most  serious  diseases  of  the  dog's  teeth  is  inflammation  of  the 
covering  of  the  fang  of  the  tooth,  together  with  that  of  the  tooth-socket  or 
alveoius,  which  brings  about  receding  of  the  gum  and  loosening  of  the 
tooth,  the  root  of  which  is  bathed  in  pus,  particles  of  food,  and  saliva.  The 
gums  are  spongy,  bleed  on  the  least  touch,  and  the  mouth  gives  off  a  re- 
pulsive odor.  It  may  or  may  not  be  associated  with  tartar.  It  frequently 
arises  after  distemper,  typhus,  or  other  debilitating  disease.  It  may  be 
arrested  for  a  time  in  young  dogs,  but  usually  the  teeth  fall  out  or  have 
to  be  extracted.  As  this  disease  is  a  progressive  one,  and  mostly  occurs 
in  dogs  that  have  their  food  cut  up  finely  or  have  soft  puppy  food  given 
them  and  teeth  are  not  essential,  should  any  of  them  become  loosened 
they  should  be  extracted.  If  the  gum  has  receded  in  young  dogs  after  some 
debilitating  disease,  it  should  be  brushed  with  peroxide  of  hydrogen  to 
see  if  it  will  arrest  its  progress.  Prevention  should  be  aimed  at  by  giving 
dogs  tearing  food. 

The  rarest  disease  of  the  dog's  teeth  is  true  dental  disease,  caries,  or 
properly  called  decayed  teeth.  As  not  one  in  twenty  or  more,  thousand 
dogs  suffer  from  it,  it  need  not  be  discussed,  beyond  mentioning,  should 
It  arise,  the  tooth  should  either  be  stopped  or  extracted. 

An  associated  disease  of  the  carnassial,  sometimes  precarnassial  or 
cutting  molar  or  back  tooth  of  the  upper  jaw  is  an  abscess  or  swelling  on 
the  cheek  just  below  and  a  little  in  front  of  the  eye,  which  bursts  and  gives 
rise  to  a  discharge  and  then  heals  up,  to  break  out  again  and  again,  form- 
ing a  fistula,  etc.  As  it  is  mostly  due  to  some  disease  of  the  tooth  or 
teeth,  which  should  be  extracted,  as  no  other  treatment  is  of  permanent  use. 
It  is  also  seen  in  cats. 

There  are  several  defects  in  the  position  of  the  teeth  in  the  jaws,  and 
also  defects  of  the  jaw  itself,  so  that  the  teeth  do  not  meet  properly;  and 
as  these  are  not  diseases,  but  only  faulty  or  arrested  developments,  they 
will  not  be  discussed,  but  only  mentioned  here.  The  commonest  defect 
is  undershot,  where  the  lower  jaw  protrudes  in  advance  of  the  upper  jaw; 
and  overshot,  where  the  upper  jaw  protrudes  in  front  of  the  lower  jaw. 
All  degrees  of  deformity  are  encountered,  that  of  the  upper  jaw  some- 
times advancing  several  inches.  In  some  cases  of  chorea,  affecting  the 
head  and  jaws  after  distemper  during  youth,  when  the  bones  of  the  skull 
are  still  yielding  to  pressure,  the  teeth  protrude  from  the  mouth  outward  at 
right  angles,  so  that  the  inner  surface  of  the  upper  teeth  meet  the  inner  sur- 
face of  the  lower  ones,  and  not  touching  at  the  points. 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  257 


PUPPIES 

A  valuable  special  article,  written  by  Harry  W.  Lacy,  editor  American 
Fancier,  for  this  book: 


There  is  such  a  vast  difference  in  the  constitution,  purpose  and  envi- 
ronment of  different  breeds  that  each  one  must  be  regarded  in  a  different 
light.  A  lapdog  leading  a  sedentary  life  must  not  be  fed  like  a  setter,  nor 
a  bulldog  like  a  hard-worked  hound.  So  it  is  in  training.  Each  breed 
must  be  approached  according  to  its  natural  vocation. 

There  should  be  no  trouble  in  raising  most  of  the  puppies,  and  the  point 
that  most  inexperienced  people  fail  to  realize  is  that  the  puppy  organism  is 
a  comparatively  delicate  one,   requiring   considerable  care. 

The  most  delicate  time  in  a  puppy's  life  is  from  the  fifth  or  sixth  week 
— the  time  of  weaning — until  at  least  the  third  month — it  is  between  these 
ages  that  most  puppies  are  sold.  Up  to  the  age  of  weaning  the  pup  has 
been  reared  exclusively  by  its  mother,  and  it  is  during  the  time  following 
this  period,  when  the  youngster  is  having  a  change  of  food,  that  it  is  sub- 
ject to  a  variety  of  ills.  To  start  at  the  beginning,  the  pup  you  have 
selected  is  either  a  nervous  littte  thing,  needing  reassurance,  or  a  cheeky 
brat,  that  needs  suppressing  from  fche  first.  You  will  know  which  va- 
riety you  have  got  the  instant  the  lid  of  the  box  is  off  and  the  pup  finds 
himself  in  a  strange  place.  The  few  hours  on  the  journey  have  been  trying 
ones.  Taken  from  his  dam  and  friends  and  set  down  amid  the  noise  of 
strange  sounds,  he  often  has  a  case  of  nerves.  But  the  dog  above  all  is 
a  gregarious  creature  and  If  properly  approached  he  will  make  himself  at 
home. 

The  moment  the  puppy  arrives  is  the  time  to  take  possession  of  the 
field.  For  at  least  a  week  the  utmost  vigilance  is  required.  If  care  be 
taken  to  prevent  him  from  erring  in  that  first  week,  he  will  know  his  posi- 
tion and  limitations  at  once.  But  if  he  be  allowed  to  own  the  house  it 
will  mean  months  of  arduous  and  discouraging  work  later  to  subdue  him. 
If  the  pup  shows  signs  of  fear  at  first,  caress  him  a  little  just  to  get  up 
his  nerve,  but  be  careful  to  have  him  alone,  as  there  is  nothing  so  discon- 
certing to  the  infant  as  to  be  pounced  upon  by  a  lot  of  strangers.  When 
he  shows  signs  of  "coming  to"  let  him  have  a  few  moments  exercise  in  the 
yard  by  himself.  The  air  will  benefit  him  after  confinement  and  it  will  give 
him  an  opportunity  to  answer  the  imperative  calls  of  puppy  nature. 

After  a  slight  investigation  and  a  few  turns  around  the  yard  the  pup 
will  regain  his  nerves  and  be  ready  for  a  feed — most  of  them  are  con- 
stantly thinking  of  their  stomachs  when  awake.  Be  careful  to  make  his 
meal  very  frugal,  as  it  is  always  unwise  to  feed  while  the  pup  is  in  a 
state  of  excitement,  or  immediately  after  strenuous  exercise.  I  would 
recommend  a  little  "puppy  biscuit" — which  can  be  procured  at  any  of  the 
pet  shops — cracked  up  fine  and  softened  with  hot  water.  A  little  pure 
gravy  or  meat  soup-stock,  free  from  grease,  added  will  prove  very  tempt- 
ing, but  if  he  will  take  the  biscuit  alone  it  is  just  as  well  to  omit  the  gravy, 
until  you  are  sure  the  pup  is  healthy.  Pups,  like  babies,  have  extremely 
delicate  interior  plumbing,  and  if  that  can  be  kept  in  order  until  they  are 
well  started  on  their  growth  there  should  be  no  difficulty. 

After  feeding  procure  a  solid  beef  bone — not  too  large  for  the  dog  to 
handle  with  ease — with  nothing  on  it  but  a  bit  of  tooth  gristle,  and  let 
him  take  it  to  his  bed  and  be  quiet.  There  is  no  solace  so  sweet  as  a  good 
bone.  Left  alone  he  will  soon  devote  his  time  to  the  bone  and  gnaw  him- 
self asleep.     And  if  undisturbed  he  will  awaken  with  a  kindly  disposition 


258  USEFUL   INFORMATION   REGARDING   DOGS. 

towards  his  surroundings.  The  next  step  in  order  is  to  introduce  him  with 
as  little  disturbance  as  possoble  to  the  members  of  the  family.  These 
things  look  trivial  on  the  face,  but  they  save  a  vast  amount  of  confusion  In 
the  puppy   mind   and   a   deal   of  trouble   to   the   owner. 

One  particular  reason  for  avoiding  excitement  is  that  very  small  puppies 
have  little  self-control,  and  a  sudden  fright,  or  even  surprise,  will  result  in 
the  spoiling  of  a  good  carpet  and  this  accident  will  render  house-breaking 
very  difficult.  A  very  important  problem  to  decide  at  once  is  whether  or 
not  the  dog  is  to  be  raised  inside  the  house.  It  is  very  dangerous  to  allow 
a  young  dog  to  sleep  one  night  in  a  warm  room  and  the  next  to  lie  out  in  the 
cold.  A  house  dog  is  much  more  delicate  than  one  raised  outside,  not  only 
on  account  of  being  tender  through  the  comforts  of  artificial  heat,  but 
from  a  deficient  coat. 

If  the  dog  is  to  live  inside  have  his  bed  in  one  place  and  make  him 
use  it.  If  he  is  to  live  outside,  prepare  a  warm  box  which  is  water  tight 
and  fill  it  well  with  clean  straw.  Rye  straw  will  keep  a  dog  almost  as 
clean  as  washing.  Scrupulously  avoid  rags  or  old  carpets,  as  they  hold 
the  dirt  and  dampness,  and  are  consequently  unhealthy.  It  is  wise  to  raise 
the  kennel  several  inches  from  the  ground,  as  it  allows  a  free  circulation 
of  the  air  and  prevents  dampness.  In  cold  weather  the  kennel  should  be 
as  small  as  comfort  will  permit,  as  the  heat  of  the  body  san  raise  it  to  a 
better  temperature  than  a  larger  one.  But  whether  your  puppy  is  to  live 
inside  or  out,  make  the  decision  at  once  and  put  him  in  his  place  as  soon 
as  possible.  If  he  be  destined  to  live  outside  take  every  precaution  to 
have  the  kennel  sheltered  and  dry.  After  a  feed  and  a  sleep  the  dog  will 
accommodate  himself  to  his  surroundings,  and  it  is  always  best  to  initiate 
him  into  his  regular  routine  as  soon  as  he  enters  a  new  home.  This  is 
imperative. 

Dogs,  especially  when  young,  are  largely  creatures  of  habit,  and  it  i3 
therefore  of  the  greatest  importance  to  start  them  right.  Bad  habits  are 
formed  so  quickly  and  are  so  difficult  to  break,  that  with  puppies  a  negative 
course  must  be  pursued  for  a  short  time — at  least  until  the  idea  of  obe- 
dience is  learned.  Before  teaching  your  dogs  tricks,  devote  your  time  to 
the  installing  in  his  mind  the  fact  that  he  is  your  companion,  but  that 
you  are  always  master.  For  a  week  or  ten  days  keep  him  in  the 
straight  and  narrow  path  that  leadeth  to  dogdom.  This  is  not  a  difficult 
task.  It  requires  attention  and  patience,  but  in  no  case  is  the  old  saying, 
"an  ounce  of  prevention  is  worth  a  pound  of  cure"  truer  than  in  the 
training  of  dogs.  Every  successful  breeder  knows  this.  By  cleanliness, 
proper  feeding  and  exercise  he  prevents  disease,  or  at  least  reduces  it  to  a 
minimum.  By  beginning  training  early  he  prevents  the  development  of  bad 
habits.  It  is  just  as  important  for  the  house  pet  to  be  guarded  with  the 
same  care.  Don't  allow  your  new  puppy  privileges  on  his  arrival  that  will 
be  forbidden  later.  If  he  is  not  fed  at  the  table  he  will  not  have  to  be 
chastised  for  being  a  nuisance  when  his  presence  is  undesirable.  Above 
all,  if  you  would  save  your  pet  from  the  many  disorders  common  to  young 
puppies  and  from  untold  suffering,  refrain  from  feeding  cake  and  sweet- 
meats, and  scrupulously  guard  his  stomach. 


DOG  WORLD 

A  REAL  LIVE  UP-TO -DATE 

CANINE  MONTHLY 

PUBLICATION 

"THAT'S  ALL" 

NUF   SAID 


SUBSCRIPTIONS  $1.00  A  YEAR 

SAMPLE  COPY  ON  APPLICATION 


Dog  World  Publishing  Co. 

1333  So.  California  Ave. 
Chicago,  111 


260  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 


THE  DOGLESS   BOY 

"But  the  poor  dog,  in  life  the  firmest  friend, 

The  first  to  welcome,  foremost  to  defend, 

Whose  honest  heart  is  still  his  master's  own, 

Who  labors,  fights,  lives,  breathes  for  him  alone." 

— Byron. 
Boy  is  used  here  in  a  generic  sense,  for  the  love  of  animals,  and  espe- 
cially dogs  ,is  not  confined  to  either  sex.  We  do  not  think  a  boy  was  ever 
born  who,  if  "entered"  properly,  would  not  love  a  dog  when  given  the  op- 
portunity. There  seems  to  be  some  affinity,  between  children  and  dogs. 
The  selfish  cat  may  be  a  family  pet,  but  its  horizon  of  affection  is  usually 
filled  with  a  warm  fireside  and  a  saucer  of  milk  and  the  claws  within  the 
velvet  are  typical  of  its  nature;  uncertain  of  temperament  and  cruel  even 
in  its  seeming  play.  Not  so  the  dog.  It  matters  not  whether  his  lineage 
proclaims  him  a  blue  blood  or  a  mongrel,  there  is  something  behind  the  eye 
of  a  dog  which  draws  to  the  heart.  No  animal  is  so  responsive  to  the  hu- 
manizing effect  as  the  dog.  His  idiosyncracies  and  temperament  are,  like 
those  of  man,  much  a  matter  of  environment.  Cuff  him  and  treat  him 
generally  as  an  Ishmael  and  he  becomes  one,  treat  him  like  so  many  are 
in  kennels  nowadays,  as  a  mere  chattel  to  be  housed  and  fed  as  one  of  a 
number  and  he  becomes  a  mere  automaton;  but  treat  him  as  a  friend,  as 
one  of  your  household  and  how  soon  the  human  influence  is  marked.  His 
ideas  are  widened,  his  intelligence  develops  and  the  many  beautiful  traits 
of  a  confiding,  honest  nature  which  have  earned  him  the  title  of  man's 
best  friend,  are  brought  to  the  surface.  Though  the  society  of  man  has 
a  humanizing  effect  on  our  four-footed  friends,  the  dog  himself  in  no  less 
manner,  through  his  transparent  temperament  and  honest  actions  may  sug- 
gest and  encourage  the  same  traits  in  the  budding  nature  of  his  little  friend. 
Every  boy  should  own  a  dog.  Josh  Billings  well  said  that  in  the  whole 
history  of  the  world  there  is  but  one  thing  that  money  cannot  buy,  to  wit: 
"The  wag  of  a  dog's  tail."  He  might  have  added  there  is  no  animal  on 
God's  earth  who,  in  the  honesty  of  his  affection,  will  still  love  and  wag 
his  tail  for  the  hand  which  beats  him.  The  love  of  Bill  Sykes'  dog  for  his 
brutal  master  is  one  of  the  sublimest  thoughts  Dickens  ever  conceived. 

The  boy  who  is  raised  with  a  dog  for  a  "pal"  is  unwillingly  humanized. 
The  love  for  another  is  engendered  in  his  heart,  and  afterward  has  its 
effect  on  his  conduct  in  the  wide  world  of  mankind.  Be  his  nature  cruel, 
more  from  thoughtlessness  than  any  inherent  feeling,  if  he  is  a  lad  worth 
his  salt  he  cannot  but  learn  a  lesson  from  the  mild  reproach  of  the  brute 
he  torments. 

A  horse  would  kick,  a  cat  would  bite  or  scratch  under  the  same  pro- 
vocation; not  so  the  dog.  There  are  exceptions,  of  course,  but  no  dog,  we 
believe,  is  born  savage;  if  he  develops  bad  temper  it  is  generally  due  to 
environment,  and  the  parent's  judgment  must  be  exercised  in  providing  the 
right  sort  of  dog  for  the  doy,  as  in  other  provisions  for  his  welfare.  A  man 
may  become  a  lover  of  dogs  when  manhood's  cares  and  responsibilities  place 
the  dog  on  the  same  level  as  a  favorite  pipe.  He  has  missed  something. 
He  will  not  "get  into"  his  dog  as  he  would  have  done  as  a  boy.  Once  a 
dog  lover  always  a  dog  lover,  no  matter  whether  the  circumstances  of  his 
after  life  compel  him  to  love  them  from  afar.  The  dog  is  the  better  for  it 
and  so  is  the  man.     Buy  your  son  a  dog. — H.  W.  L. 

HOW  TO  WASH  A  DOG. 

Use  luke  warm  water  in  summer,  but  in  winter  it  can  be  warmer.  Wash 
almost  any  place  in  summer,  except  in  a  windy  place;  but  in  winter  do  it 
in  a  warm  room.     A  couple  of  baths  a  week  in  summer  are  sufficient  for 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  261 

health  and  cleanliness,  and  one  bath  a  week  is  really  just  as  good,  and, 
if  you  would  give  the  dog  in  addition  a  brushing  and  grooming,  I  much 
prefer  tbis  plan.     Once  a  month  in  winter  is  enough. 

Winter  baths  are  risky,  and  great  care  should  be  exercised  as  to 
exposure  to  wet  or  cold  weather  afterward.  In  giving  a  bath  in  cold 
weather  do  so  in  a  warm  room,  using  warm  water.  Give  him  a  good  sham- 
pooing— and  nothing  so  good  as  your  hands — using  plenty  of  soap  and 
rubbing  it  in  so  as  to  open  the  pores  of  the  skin,  and  then  rinse  off  with 
lukewarm  water.  Avoid  getting  the  soap  suds  into  the  dog's  eyes,  or  down 
too  deep  into  his  ears,  and  thoroughly  dry  the  ears  inside.  An  old  wool 
blanket  (a  clean  one  of  course),  is  a  good  thing  for  the  first  drying,  finish- 
ing up  with  rough  towels.  Be  sure  and  get  the  dog's  head,  neck  and  breast 
dry,  for  here  lies  the  danger  of  catching  cold,  and  be  careful  as  to  exposure 
out  of  doors  that  day  if  weather  is  cold  or  wet,  exercising  the  same  care 
and  precaution  you  would  for  yourself  after  a  bath. 

Now,  as  to  soap.  Don't  consider  that  any  soap  will  do  for  your  dog, 
for  it  won't  if  you  value  a  fine  coat  on  him.  Many  common  soaps  will  in- 
jure and  ruin  a  dog's  coat  even  more  than  they  would  your  own  skin  if  you 
used  them.  A  cake  of  dog  soap  will  only  cost  a  quarter  and  last  for 
several  baths,  so  it's  not  expensive  to  use  a  good  one,  in  fact  is  cheaper 
in  the  end.  There  is  no  dog  soap  "just  the  same,"  or,  quite  as  good  as 
Eberhart's.  It  is  a  different  soap  from  any  other,  containing  one  ingre- 
dient that  no  other  dog  soap  ever  made — does  contain — this  one  ingre- 
dient is  a  secret.  There  is  no  carbolic  acid  in  my  soap,  as  there  is  in  so 
many  dog  soaps,  a  dangerous  article  to  use,  and  quite  so  in  a  soap  through 
absorption.  It  is  made  in  as  careful  and  cleanly  a  manner  as  is  any  soap 
made  for  our  own  use,  and  I  just  want  to  say  here  that  no  face  soap  made 
for  people  is  quite  so  good  to  use  on  your  own  face.  As  a  dandruff  cure  on 
your  head  nothing  made  can  surpass  it,  besides  it  is  a  hair  grower,  and  a 
cure  as  well  for  any  scalp  disease.  A  quarter  pound  bar  of  it  I  can  send 
you  by  mail  for  Twenty-five  Cents,  or  a  dozen  for  $2.50,  carriage  paid. 

Spend  at  least  ten  minutes  in  thoroughly  shampooing  your  dog,  then 
rinse  and  dry  dog  thoroughly.  In  summer  weather  a  good  walk,  or  a  romp 
in  a  grassy  yard  is  a  very  good  thing  for  the  dog  after  a  bath  and  it 
has  been  partially  dried,  which  saves  you  some  labor  as  in  turning  the  dog 
out  in  the  yard;  it  will  naturally  run  and  romp  and  finishing  drying  up. 
This  plan  can  only  work  in  warm,  sunshiny  weather.  If  my  soap  is  used 
to  kill  fleas  or  lice,  both  of  which  it  will  do,  then  it  must  be  used  as  di- 
rected for  such  cases — the  lather  being  allowed  to  remain  on  for  some 
time.  Don't  allow  dog  to  rest  or  lie  down  till  its  coat  is  absolutely  dry,  and 
never  wash  within  two  hours  after  it  was  fed. 

As  to  washing  Long  Coated  Dogs,  that  will  often  appear  to  be  dry 
when  they  are  not,  you  must  exercise  great  care.  Fill  a  foot  tub  with 
lukewarm  (not  hot)  water,  so  that  it  reaches  to  the  elbow  of  the  dog, 
and  beginning  at  head,  cover  the  entire  body  with  soap  suds,  never  letting 
the  soap  itself  get  into  the  coat.  With  a  soft  hair  brush  of  long  bristles, 
brush  the  hair  with  the  soap  suds  downward  from  the  centre,  until  he  is 
perfectly  clean.  Rinse  out  the  coat  with  lukewarm  water,  place  the  dog  on  a 
table,  envelope  in  a  soft  towel,  and  smooth  it  from  the  centre  downward  till 
he  is  absolutely  dry.  Never  ruffle  or  rub  the  coat,  or  you  will  spoil  it;  simply 
smooth  it. 

To  prevent  a  dog  catching  cold  after  a  bath  apply  alcohol  over  the 
entire  body.  Exercise  after  a  bath  will  stimulate  circulation.  A  very 
little  cocoanut  oil,  thinned  with  warm  alcohol  in  the  palm  of  the  hand,  rub- 
bed over  the  coat  will  greatly  improve  it  after  washing. 

In  lieu  of  winter  baths  with  no  risk  to  run  as  to  catching  cold,  a  good 
grooming  for  ten  minutes  with  a  stiff  brush  will  accomplish  all  the  good 
results  of  a  bath,  and  this  you  can  do  every  day  with  great  benefit  to  the 
dog.  Grooming  is  better  and  safer  than  baths  in  winter.  In  preparing  dogs 
for  a  bench  show  professional  handlers  groom  their  dogs  every  day  for 
a  month  beforehand,  and  this  is  why  you  always  see  show  dogs  with  such 
fine  coats. 


UC:',  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 


LISTED  WRONG. 
By  Edgar  A.  Guest,  in  Detroit  Free  Press. 

I'VE  never  known  a  dog  to  wag 
His  tail  in  glee  if  he  did  not  feel, 

Nor  quit  his  old-time  friend,  to  tag 
At  some  more  influential  heel. 

The  yellowest  cur  I  ever  knew 

Was,  to  the  hoy  who  loved  him,  true. 

I've  never  known  a  dog  to  show 

Halfway  devotion  to  his  friend. 
To  seek  a  kinder  man  to  know, 

Or  richer;  but  unto  the  end 
The  humblest  dog  I  ever  knew 
Was,  to  the  man  who  loved  him,  true. 

I've  never  known  a  dog  to  fake 

Affection  for  a  present  gain, 
A  false  display  of  love  to  make 

Some  little  favor  to  attain. 
I've  never  known  a  Prince  or  Spot 
That  seemed  to  be  what  he  was  not. 

But  I  have  known  a  dog  to  fight 

With  all  his  strength  to  shield  his  friend, 

And,  whether  wrong  or  whether  right, 
To  stick  with  him  unto  the  end. 

And  I  have  known  a  dog  to  lick 

The  hand  of  him  that  men  would  kick. 

And  I  have  known  a  dog  to  bear 
Starvation's  pangs  from  day  to  day, 

With  him  who  had  been  glad  to  share 
His  bread  and  meat  along  the  way. 

No  dog,  however  mean  or  rude, 

Is  guilty  of  ingratitude. 

The  dog  is  listed  with  the  dumb, 
No  voice  has  he  to  speak  his  creed. 

His  messages  to  humans  come 
By  faithful  conduct  and  by  deed. 

He  shows,  as  seldom  mortas  do, 

A  high  ideal  of  being  true. 


*±1 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  263 


BENCH    SHOWS 


THE  GOOD  AND  BAD  OF. 

I  have  both  judged  and  superintended  dog  shows  for  many  years,  have 
shown  my  own  dogs  for  forty  years,  and  as  a  "Professional  Handler,"  am 
doing  so  yet,  making  about  all  the  important  shows  in  the  United  States, 

To  ship  your  dog  to  any  show,  and  trust  it  to  the  care  of  show  atten- 
dants to  feed,  water  and  exercise — is  simply  a  case  of  cruelty  to  animals, 
such  dogs  I  see  at  a  show. 

Having  superintended  dog  shows,  I  know  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to 
hire  attendants  that  will  properly  do  their  duties,  being  as  they  are,  a  lot 
of  fellows  who  take  the  job  because  they  "are  out  of  work" — chronic  in 
their  cases — due  to  their  worthlessness,  etc. 

The  premium  lists  always  read  that — "all  dogs  will  be  fed,  watered, 
exercised  and  returned  promptly" — signed  by  the  superintendent,  which  is 
meant  all  right,  and  if  this  one  man,  the  superintendent,  could  do  the  work 
of  a  hundred  men,  your  dog  might  then  be  properly  or  better  cared  for 
— but  entrusted  to  the  care  of  attendants — it  is  not,  unless  you  have  a  good 
handler  engaged.  At  every  show,  no  exceptions,  I  see  many  a  poor  dog 
that  is  never  taken  off  his  bench  for  exercise  or  to  attend  to  nature's  calls, 
and  while  he  may  get  a  drink  or  two  and  have  some  dog  biscuit  wet  with 
plain  water  shoved  at  him  to  eat — just  stop  and  realize  what  a  hard  and 
cruel  time  he  is  having  at  the  show — and  don't  wonder  that  he  comes 
home  sick  and  in  many  cases  a  "dead  dog"  the  result.  These  are  plain,  cold 
facts  and  can't  be  disputed.  Aside  from  the  cruel  part,  it  is  as  essential 
to  have  your  dog  well  shown  when  judged,  as  it  would  be  to  have  your 
horse  well  driven  in  a  race — if  you  expect  to  win.  Dogs  sent  unaccom- 
panied by  a  handler,  are  yanked  or  pulled  into  the  ring  by  an  attendant,  a 
stranger  to  the  dog,  and  the  result  accordingly,  in  almost  every  instance. 
During  the  many  years  I  have  shown  dogs,  I  have  rarely  had  a  dog  sick 
afterward  as  the  result  of  being  at  a  show.     The  reason  is  this: 

I  go  to  shows  on  the  same  train  with  my  dogs,  water  and  care  for  them 
en  route,  if  a  "lay  over,"  so  do  I  and  the  dogs  are  taken  care  of  as  they 
deserve.  At  the  show,  every  dog  in  my  string  is  taken  off  his  bench  for  ex- 
ercise four  to  five  times  daily,  fresh  water  kept  in  stall,  bedding  kept  clean 
and  changed,  bowels  watched  when  out  for  exercise  (which  if  wrong,  proper 
treatment  given),  and  instead  of  trusting  them  to  eat  the  dog  bread  mois- 
tened with  water,  which  so  many  are  not  used  to  and  will  refuse  to  touch, 
every  dog  in  my  string  is  fed  morning  and  night  with  beef  and  mutton, 
which"  I  buy  and  have  cooked  daily.  Their  health  is  looked  after  and  if 
any  signs  of  sickness,  proper  remedies  administered.  Every  dog  at  a  show 
should  receive  such  care.  You  can't  do  too  much  for  your  dog  and  if  you 
will  arrange  with  some  good  handler  and  are  willing  to  pay  him  a  fair 
price  for  proper  care,  you  need  never  have  a  sick  dog  as  the  result  of  show- 
ing him. 

To  ship  a  dog  to  a  show  means  from  a  day  or  two  to  three  days  in 
his  crate,  confined  and  uncared  for  as  to  food,  drink,  or  a  chance  to  attend 
to  nature's  calls,  and  thern,  if  dog  is  addressed  to  the  superintendent,  when 
he  finally  arrives  at  the  show,  he  may  lay  that  day  yet  in  his  crate  before 
taken  out,  (the  superintendent  a  very  busy  man),  and  some  attendant  fin- 
ally takes  dog  out  and  without  even  putting  dog  in  the  exercising  ring,  puts 
dog  on  his  bench — where  the  poor  dog  very  likely  stays  for  the  three  or 
four  days  of  the  show;  very  little  if  any  attention  paid  to  him  till  he  is 
packed  up  for  his  return  trip  home.     Your  dog  has  been  serving  time  in 


264  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

prison — and  just  think  how  he  has  suffered,  and  don't  wonder  if  he  comes 
home  sick.  If  you  can  go  yourself — with  your  dog — to  care  for  him,  do 
this,  but  never  send  him  to  a  dog  show  alone.  Get  a  handler,  if  you  can 
find  a  good  man,  who,  aside  from  handling  as  a  business,  really  loves  dogs, 
and  you  think  will  care  for  the  dog — as  the  writer  does — and  be  willing 
to  pay  him  his  price  for  handling — for  your  dog  deserves  the  best  care  he 
can  get. 

I  am  prepared  to  receive  and  condition  dogs  previous  to  shows.  At 
every  show,  without  any  exceptions,  I  see  dogs  on  their  bench — neglected — 
and  while  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  attend  to  them  all,  yet  I  always  do 
and  sometimes  exercise,  if  I  possibly  can. 


DOGS  AS  CHILDREN'S   PETS 


Nothing  in  the  world  is  more  natural  than  the  child's  desire  for  pets. 
There  are  few  children  who  do  not  early  manifest  a  strong  inclination  for 
something  to  love,  and  this  imperative  desire,  if  fostered,  becomes  a  power- 
ful agency  for  the  child's  growth  of  character.  Every  little  girl  loves  her 
doll,  but  often  she  becomes  dissatisfied  and  longs  for  something  alive, 
something  which  will  return  her  caresses.  A  mother  who  has  a  growing 
family  must  do  something  to  keep  the  little  hands  and  minds  busy,  and  at 
the  same  time  out  of  mischief.  Perhaps  the  mother  is  very  busy,  or  if  she 
gives  the  matter  any  thought,  she  may  dislike  animals  and  consider  cats 
a  nuisance,  dogs  noisy,  birds  a  great  care,  rabbits  destructive,  and  white 
rats  dirty.  She  may  wonder  why  the  children  do  not  love  their  home  and 
how  it  is  they  are  always  teasing  to  visit  that  home  where  the  children 
have  pets  of  various  kinds,  "a  perfect  menagerie,"  as  she  scornfully  calls 
it.  Alas!  How  many  mothers  and  fathers  .cherich  their  selfish  ease  and 
consult  their  convenience,  without  a  thought  of  finding  their  highest  en- 
joyment in  the  true  development  of  their  children. 

"Our  first  plea  in  favor  of  children  owning  pets  is  the  desire  for  per- 
sonal possession  which  every  child  has.  The-  wish  for  something  that  shall 
belong  exclusively  to  himself  and  be  cared  for  by  him.  This  care,  this  re- 
sponsibility, can  not  fail  to  make  a  boy  more  manly  and  a  girl  more  wo- 
manly.' The  thought  for  food  and  comfort  of  the  little  animals  tends  to 
develop  all  that  is  strong  and  tender  in  the  child's  nature.  Show  us  a 
boy  or  a  girl  that  is  cruel  or  brutal  to  animals  and  we  will  show  you  a  child 
sure  to  come  to  some  bad  end;  but  the  child  who  early  learns  kindness 
and  gentleness  to  the  brute  creation  will  also  manifest  the  same  spirit 
toward  his  fellow  creatures.  •   •  .  .....' 

"Children  are,  as  a  rule,  fond  of  animals;  and  by  no  means  can  kind- 
ness be  so  thoroughly  inculcated  in  them  as  by  the  care  of  pets. 

"People  who  do  not  love  animals  have  something  seriously  wrong 
in  their  constitution.  A  great  man  once  said,  'I  would  not  give  much  for 
that  man's  religion  whose  dog  and  cat  are  not  the  better  for  it.'  A  man 
who  kicks  his  dog  and  beats  his  horse  will  abuse  his  wife  and  children. 
When  you  encourage  a  child  in  the  care  and  gentle  treatment  of  all  crea- 
tures, you  influence  him  to  become  a  true  gentleman  or  gentlewoman,  and 
you  give  the  world  one  who  will  expand  in  life  and  become  a  tender 
father  and  worthy  citizen.  Every  child  should  know  at  a  nearly  age  that 
sincere  kindness  in  all  relations  of  life  is  highest  Christianity.  *  *  * 
Allow  the  children  a  pet  dog,  because  dogs  are  so  devoted,  so  intelligent,  so 
faithful  that  they  are  ready  to  sacrifice  their  lives  for  those  they  love. 

"Once  kind  to  animals  always  kind,  and  the  man  or  woman  whose 
heart  is  touched  by  the  dumb  look  of  dependence  or  unselfish  interest  in 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  265 

brute  nature  cannot  be  wholly  bad  though  public  sentiment  may  make  he 
or  she  a  criminal. 

"All  animals  are  God's  creatures  with  an  intelligence  a  little  lower  than 
our  own;  they  are  moreover  dumb  and  helpless  and  should  appeal  to  every 
noble-hearted  person  for  protection.  The  curse  of  the  world  is  heartless- 
ness,  selfishness  and  cruelty. 

"Animals  are  God's  object-lessons,  and  the  only  object-lesson  in  Na- 
ture into  which  he  has  breathed  the  breath  of  life." 

Sir  Walter  Scott's  eulogy:  "The  Almighty,  Who  gave  the  dog  to  be 
the  companion  of  our  pleasures  and  our  toils,  hath  invested  him  with  a 
nature  noble  and  incapable  of  deceit.  He  forgets  neither  friend  nor  foe, 
remembers  with  accuracy  both  benefit  and  injury,  and  hath  a  share  of 
man's  intelligence  but  no  share  of  man's  falsehood."  Not  only  have  poets 
honored  and  glorified  the  courage,  patience  and  fidelity  of  dogs,  but  the 
world's  greatest  artists  have  portrayed  their  humility  and  affection.  There  is 
also  positive  proof  that  in  the  Pharaonic  age,  nearly  sixty  centuries  ago, 
dogs  were  the  companions  and  friends  of  kings,  and  each  had  a  name  of  its 
own,  and  this  at  a  period  when  only  those  whose  personality  was  recognized 
were  ever  given  a  name. 


PATHOS 


This  gem,  pathetic  and  beautiful,  was  in  my  last  book,  and  is  too  good 
to  be  left  out  of  this. 

Mr.  H.  G.  Jeffrey,  of  the  Fifth  Mounted  Infantry,  stationed  at  the  Mod- 
der  River,  Cape  Colony,  sends  Our  Dogs  the  following  interesting  and  pa- 
thetic account  of  the  return  home  of  the  Boers  after  the  war: 

"Peace  has  come  at  last.  Mothers,  both  English  and  Dutch,  have  been 
relieved  of  great  anxiety;  the  daily  searching  of  the  papers,  the  terrible 
uncertainty,  is  all  over.  Briton  and  Boer  are  now  united;  the  latter  are 
now  returning  to  their  homes. 

"Let  us  accompany  a  young  burgher  who  has  escaped  from  the  terrible 
conflict.  Go  with  him  back  to  the  old  homestead  beneath  the  'kop,'  on  the 
threshold  of  what  was  once  his  happy  home — now  nothing  more  than  a 
desolate  ruin.  He  sits  down  on  all  that  is  left  of  the  'stoep,'  lost  in  reverie. 
He  is  fighting  all  his  battles  over  again,  thinking  of  those  who  had  sat 
on  that  same  'stoep'  three  years  ago.  The  sun  is  just  settling  with  that 
gloriousness  for  which  the  African  veldt  alone  is  famous.  The  stillness  is 
more  than  he  can  bear,  and  he  could  almost  weep  for  very  loneliness.  But 
hark!  He  is  not  alone;  softly  a  cold  nose  pushes  itself  into  his  hand,  and 
two  wistful,  loving  eyes  are  upturned  to  his.  'Tis  his  old  dog,  a  skeleton 
of  former  days;  too  weak  almost  to  stand,  but  who  has  remained  faithfully 
watching  the  old  home,  never  expecting  to  hear  his  beloved  master's  voice 
again.  I  know  there  are  plenty  of  canine  hearts  and  tongues  left  amongst 
the  ruined  homesteads  that  will  give  a  hearty  welcome  to  their  long-lost 
masters." 


266  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

ONLY  A  COLLIE  DOG. 


The  trolley's  rumple  sounded 

Above  the  voice  of  man, 
"When  out  upon  the  pavement 

A  little  child  ran. 

Men  held  their  breath  in  silence, 

For  down  upon  her  bore 
A  big  whirring  auto  car 

With  honk,  and  glare  and  roar. 

But  out  upon  the  pavement, 

In  the  heart  of  London's  fog, 
There  dashed,  not  heeding  danger,. 

A  big  brown  collie  dog. 

Without  a  thought  of  danger, 

While  men  held  their  breath, 
Out  of  the  grasp  of  heaven 

He  snatched  the  child  from  death. 

But  there  upon   the  pavement, 

In  the  midst  of  London's  fog, 
Lay  the  bruised  and  torn  body 

Of  only  a  collie  dog. 
Stratford,  Ont.  — Georgia  Wrinkler. 


BUY  A  DOG. 


"I've  been  a  good  fellow,  boys, 
I've  earned  all  I've  spent; 
Paid  all  I  borrowed, 
Lost  all  I  lent. 

I  loved  a  woman  once, 
That  came  to  an  end; 

Buy  a  dog,  boys, 

He  is  always  your  friend." 


LADDIE." 


This  poetic  tribute  to  the  dog  that  has  gone  beyond  after  a  life  of  devo- 
tion to  his  master  seems  to  us  one  of  the  best  and  most  touchingly  real. 
It  was  written  by  the  playwright  who  resides  at  Kensington,  L.  I.,  on  the 
passing  of  his  favorite  collie.  Without  a  trace  of  the  maudlin  it  touches 
the  chord  that  holds  the  dog  so  near  to  man: 

He  wagged  his  tail,  to  the  very  last 

And  he  smiles,  in  his  last,  long  sleep. 
The  troubles  of  life,  for  him,  are  past, 

In  his  grave,  a  few  feet  deep. 

His  soul,  for  I  feel  that  he  had  a  soul 

And  he  thought  real  thoughts,  I  know, 
Has  found   the  ultimate  end,  life's  goal, 

In  the  Heaven  where  good  dogs  go. 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  267 

He  has  lived  with  me  and  has  suffered  with  me, 

Shed  tears,  in  his  dog-like  way, 
He  has  placed  his  paw  at  times  on  my  knee, 

In  a  vain  attempt  to  say, 
"God  never  gave  us  that  wondrous  power, 

To  tell  all  the  things  we  feel, 
But  I  want  to  say,  in  my  canine  way, 

That  my  sympathy  is  real." 

So  I  loved  my  dog,  to  the  very  end 

And  he  in  our  daily  walk, 

Was  never  just  dog,  put  a  constant  friend 

And  we  had  no  need  to  talk. 
And  I  hope,  when  the  summons  comes  for  me, 

To  embark  on  the  unknown  tide, 
I  shall  find  his  eyes  in  the  Paradise, 

They  say  is  the  other  side. 

JAMES  CLARENCE  HARVEY. 


MY  TRIBUTE  TO  THE  DOG. 


Senator  Vests  tribute  to  a  dog,  (elsewhere  in  this  book),  was  probably 
the  grandest  ever  made,  and  I  want  to  offer  mine,  having  known  and  loved 
dogs  all  my  life;  and  the  balance  of  my  time  on  earth  will  be  devoted  to 
them: 

No  other  animal,  and  none  of  them  can  talk,  equals  your  dog  for 
honesty  to  you;  love,  faithfulness,  constancy,  and  all  the  traits  that  a  hu- 
man friend — your  sister,  brother,  mother  or  father — should  show  to  you. 
Your  dog  is  sad  when  he  sees  you  are  sad,  knows  you  are  lonely,  feels  for 
you  when  he  sees  and  knows  you  need  it,  (as  we  often  do),  and  if  he  could 
— would  do  anything  for  you  to  help  you,  the  one  he  loves.  He  would 
steal  or  kill  for  you,  sto  pat  nothing.  What  a  grand  and  wonderful  thing 
is  a  dog's  love  for  you — and  yours  for  your  dog,  if  you  have  been  made 
right — and  from  a  child  up,  have  loved  dogs.  You  can  never  do  too  much 
for  your  dog,  nor  can  you  improve  your  own  life  and  fit  it  for  the  unknown 
world  you  are  to  go  to,  when  death  comes,  than  to  do  all  the  good  you 
can  for  your  dog,  and  for  other  dogs,  even  the  poor  homeless  curs  you  meet 
on  the  streets,  for  they  have  as  big  a  heart,  as  noble  in  every  way,  only 
lacking  the  "pedigree,"  (not  their  fault),  as  the  fine-bred  ones.  Strive  to 
do  some  good  each  day  of  your  life  to  dogs,  for  you  can't  do  anything 
better,  (aside  from  paying  every  dollar  you  owe,  which  includes  your  taxes)., 
and  you  will  get  rewarded,  which,  if  not  so  plainly  shown  each  day — you 
are  getting  credited  for  it  in  the  big  book  up  above,  where  we  all  hope  to  go, 
and  when  the  final  balance  sheet  is  checked  off,  you  will  get  all  that  was 
coming  to  you,  because  you  have  done  good  to  dogs.  Fight  for  your  dog 
if   necessary,   he   would    for   you. 

AL.  G.  EBERHART. 


J«8  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

THE  MODEL  KENNEL — HOW  TO  BUILD. 


The  following  valuable  article  was  written  especially  for  tin's  book  by 
Mr.  Fred  Jacobi,  Proprietor  of  the  Woodbine  Kennels,  Lowell,  Mich.: 

In  view  of  the  fact  that  "Man's  Best  Friend,"  the  dog,  has  proven  him- 
self the  most  faithful  of  all  animals,  accepting  with  good  grace  such  care 
as  may  be  bestowed  upon  him,  whether  it  be  from  the  hands  of  the  rich 
whose  home  is  surrounded  with  everything  that  is  beautiful  and  luxurious, 
or  the  poor  wandering  tramp  who  can  only  afford  to  divide  the  few  crumbs 
that  he  is  able  to  beg  or  steal,  to  this  ever  true  companion  should  be  granted 
the  privilege  and  pleasure  of  a  place  that  he  may  know  is  his  home. 

The  kennel  raised  dog  has  not  the  liberties  and  pleasures  of  the  or- 
dinary house  dog,  and  to  him  more  attention  should  be  given  as  to  his 
home  and  surroundings  that  he  may  thrive  well  and  be  in  fit  condition 
to  be  seen  at  all  times.  No  dog  can  present  a  good  appearance  if  he  is 
brought  up  from  puppyhood  in  a  cellar  or  old  sheds,  cramped  quarters  and 
foul  surroundings,  with  a  dozen  mates  to  join  in  the  miserable  life,  as  is 
often  done  by  some  breeders.  It  is  no  wonder  that  these  dogs  are  always 
out  of  condition,  loaded  with  skin  diseases  which  infest  such  places.  Many 
men  would  gladly  give  their  dogs  a  better  home  and  have  surroundings 
more  comfortable,  yet  they  have  been  at  a  loss  how  to  construct  a  kennel 
that  would  be  best  adapted  for  the  dog's  welfare.  In  this  article  I  have 
tried  to  get  a  thorough  description  of  a  "model  kennel"  well  suited  for  the 
convenience  of  twenty-five  dogs,  and  as  many  more  puppies.  These  nlans 
are  not  imaginary,  but  exhibited  at  the  Woodbine  Kennels,  Lowell,  Mich., 
where  visitors  are  always  welcome. 

First  should  be  considered  the  location.  This  should  be  high  and  dry 
soil,  a  side  hill  will  give  the  best  results  so  that  excessive  rains  will  not 
form  pools  of  water  in  the  kennel  yard.  Select  your  site  and  stake  it  off  ten 
rods  square.  Get  cedar  posts  nine  feet  long,  set  them  in  the  ground  three 
feet,  one  rod  apart,  taking  special  care  that  corner  posts  are  firmly  anchored. 
Dig  a  trench  from  post  to  post  eighteen  inches  deep.  Next  get  some  No. 
12  galvanized  wire,  lay  this  in  trench  and  staple  to  each  post,  drawn  tight 
with  wire  stretcher.  After  this  wire  is  drawn  tight  all  around  the  yard 
at  bottom  of  trench,  then  start  the  second  wire  just  two  inches  above  the 
lower  wire,  then  the  third,  and  so  on  until  you  have  nine  rows  of  wire  two 
Inches  apart.  Next  throw  the  earth  into  the  trench,  leaving  the  top  wire 
exposed.  By  taking  this  precaution  you  may  rest  assured  that  your  dogs 
will  never  trouble  you  by  digging  out  of  the  kennel  yard.  Now  get  fortv 
rods  of  good,  reliable  kennel  fencing,  which  should  be  six  feet  high,  and 
a  two-inch  mesh.  Fasten  to  posts  firmly,  the  lower  wire  meeting  the  top 
wire  previously  fastened  from  post  to  post. 

The  foundation  of  kennel  building  should  be  next  to  be  considered, 
this  should  be  of  stone,  18  inches  thick  and  three  or  four  feet  high,  16x60, 
will  furnish  ample  room.  Have  opening  at  each  end  of  wall,  2x3  feet,  to 
allow  dogs  to  run  in  during  hot  days  or  stormy  weather.  Next  lay  the  joists. 
then  the  studding,  which  should  be  six  or  seven  feet  high.  Have  good 
pitch  to  roof.  Before  putting  on  siding  or  shingling,  get  some  good  building 
paper,  covering  all  sides  and  roof.  For  this  purpose  there  is  nothing  finer 
made  than  "Cabot's"  sheathing,  a  superior  building  paner,  two  lavers  of 
paner  between  which  is  woven  eel  grass  %  inch  in  thickness.  This  paper 
will  keen  out  heat  as  well  as  cold,  is  germ  proof  and  can  not  burn  on  ac- 
count of  the  saltv  nature  of  the  lining.  Place  this  on  roof  boards  before 
shingling  if  a  thorough  iob  is  wanted.  Next  put  on  your  siding.  Have 
three  windows  on  each  side.  30x6  0,  two  sash  that  will  slide  by  each  other, 
much  handier  than  ones  that  raise.  Have  door  at  each  end  of  kennel. 
Have  a  brick  chimney  built  at  each  end  of  kennel.  In  summer  time  you 
can  use  chimney  in  cook  room  with  short  length  of  pipe;  in  the  cold 
weather  you  can  run  stove  pipe  the  full  length  of  building  to  other  chim- 
ney, which  will  warm  up  the  interior  at  no  greater  expense  while  the  food  is 
being  cooked.  Next  put  up  a  partition  at  each  end  of  building,  10x16,  one 
f#  b&  used  tor  poojf  #nd  wash  pom,  (the  QtyGt  tor  .office.    The  floor  i&  f.h§ 


tlSEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  269 

Wash  room  should  be  built  on  a  slant  to  allow  all  water  to  run  away  freely. 
You  will  now  have  a  space  of  forty  feet  between  office  and  cook  room 
which  will  be  used  for  kennels  or  stalls  for  the  dogs  as  follows:  On  each 
side  of  building  from  office  to  cook  room  make  a  solid  bin  or  box  of  match- 
ed flooring  three  feet  high  and  four  feet  wide;  the  frame  work  of  this 
stall  should  be  of  two-inch  strips,  one  inch  thick,  have  them  cut  three  and 
four  feet  long,  nail  firmly  at  corner  one  of  each  size;  this  will  form  a  square; 
now  draw  a  line  from  one  end  of  room  to  other  on  each  side  near  wall, 
this  will  line  up  your  frame  work  perfectly.  Nail  one  end  of  frame  to  each 
studding,  the  other  corner  to  floor,  now  proceed  to  put  on  your  matched 
flooring.  Nail  front  solid,  the  top  should  be  en  hinge  to  get  at  dogs  and 
clean  out  easily,  so  only  nail  firmly  the  two  first  boards  near  wall,  then 
have  balance  of  top  work  on  hinge.  Now  divide  this  long  stall  in  small 
compartments  by  placing  a  partition  of  matched  flooring  at  every  second 
studding  or  four  feet,  studding  being  two  feet  apart;  have  top  sawed  across 
every  four  feet  so  that  each  stall  will  have  a  separate  door  at  top,  which 
will  give  you  ten  separate  stalls  on  each  side.  Now  have  an  opening  cut 
through  siding,  12x18,  for  a  door  in  each  stall;  have  this  at  one  end  of 
each  stall  instead  of  centre,  as  your  dogs  can  lay  away  from  doorway  in 
case  of  heavy  winds  or  hot  or  cold  weather.  In  winter  weather  for  day 
protection  have  a  common  grain  sack  or  carpet  tacked  on  inside  over  door 
to  keep  out  cold  and  severe  drafts.  For  night  protection  a  dog  should 
have  even  more  than  this  for  a  dog,  like  the  human  being  enjoys  comfort 
at  night.  For  this  purpose  the  simplest  and  best  method  is  to  have  a 
sliding  door  on  outside.  This  should  be  made  of  matched  flooring  four 
inches  wider  and  longer  than  the  opening,  and  have  this  door  made  so  it 
will  slide  easily  up  and  down  by  placing  a  screw  eye  on  top  to  which  is 
fastened  a  good  heavy  cord,  having  this  pass  up  and  over  a  pulley  through 
a  hole  in  building,  so  that  door  can  be  raised  or  lowered  at  will  from  each 
side  of  building.  After  the  stalls  are  made  you  will  have  a  large  room,  40 
feet  long  and  8  feet  wide,  where  you  can  keep  a  sick  dog  or  bitches  in 
season,  or  use  it  as  a  store  room  for  crates,  etc.  One  side  of  the  kennel  and 
yard  should  be  kept  for  matured  dogs,  the  other  for  puppies  and  bitches  in 
season  or  for  bitches  with  pups.  In  order  to  protect  the  pups  and  bitches 
in  season,  get  some  wire  fencing  and  divide  off  one  side  of  kennel  yard 
same  as  their  stalls,  nail  one  end  of  fencing  firmly  to  building  or  to  a  post 
set  at  building  and  have  this  fencing  go  straight  out  to  a  post  at  fencing 
which  composes  your  main  kennel  fence.  This  will  give  you  ten  separate 
yards  that  are  four  feet  wide  and  about  forty  feet  long,  sufficient  for  the 
puppies  until  they  are  old  enough  to  go  in  the  main  yard  with  the  matured 
dogs.  Bitches  kept  in  an  enclosure  like  this  are  absolutely  safe  from  stray 
stud  dogs,  neither  can  they  get  out,  as  has  been  the  source  of  much  an- 
noyance to  many  owners  of  bitches  in  season.  Do  not  neglect  to  place  eva 
troughs  on  building,  have  a  large  tank  to  catch  the  water  so  that  you  may 
always  have  a  good  supply  of  soft  water  for  washing  the  dogs.  The  handiest 
tub  to  wash  dogs  in  is  made  of  clear  pine  boards  14  in.  wide,  6  feet  long. 
Make  box  tight  and  paint  it.  With  a  box  like  this  you  can  work  all  around 
your  dogs  in  washing.  Place  this  tub  near  tank,  have  tank  elevated  so  that 
after  washing  you  can  give  the  dog  a  good  rinsing  from  tank  which  should 
have  a  faucet  and  short  piece  of  hose  at  bottom.  Remember  that  the 
kennel  yard  should  be  plowed  up  or  spaded  over  once  a  month;  this  will 
keep  the  soil  in  a  sweet  and  sanitary  condition.  Do  not  forget  that  a  dog 
likes  to  lay  under  the  spreading  branches  of  a  shade  tree,  and  that  it  will 
add  to  their  comfort  to  have  a  generous  amount  set  in  the  yard  as  well 
as  a  row  around  it.  For  this  purpose  there  is  not  a  handsomer  or  more 
thrifty  fast-growing,  tree  than  the  Carolina  poplar,  not  the  tall,  lanky 
Lombard  poplar,  which  is  an  eye  sore  and  nuisance.  The  Carolina  poplars 
can  be  secured  from  any  nursery  at  from  15  to  25  cents  each  when  ten  feet 
high;  these  will  make  large  trees  in  three  years.  The  kennel  yard  would 
mot  be  complete  without  a  good  pump  and  well  so  that  the  dogs  can  have 
fresh  water  several  times  each  day.  An  earthen  dish  of  good  size  is  best 
for  this,  and  have  it  sunk  in  ground  to  keep  water  cool.     If  convenience  19 


270  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

wanted  and  small  expense  not  objected  to  it  would  be  well  to  have  a  one- 
inch  pipe  run  from  pump  to  each  of  the  yards  leading  to  each  dish;  at  the 
pump  you  could  have  a  connection  that  would  fill  each  dish  independently  or 
fill  all  at  one  time;  this  would  avoid  the  bother  of  carrying  water  in  pail 
to  each  dish. 

If  you  follow  the  plans  as  set  forth  above,  I  know  you  will  have  a 
kennel  that  will  suit  you  in  every  detail  and  one  which  will  be  a  pleasure 
to  your  best  friends,  "the  dog."  Should  you  at  any  time  wish  any  further 
advice  on  this  subject,  I  will  be  only  too  pleased  to  assist  you  in  any  way 
possible,  knowing  it  will  benefit  the  kind,  dumb  creature  who  gives  his 
master  worlds  of  pleasure  and  is  ever  faithful,  be  he  the  companion  of  the 
rich  or  poor. 

Stud  JDogs. — a  great  deal  of  a  breeder's  success  depends  upon  the 
state  of  health  in  which  the  stud  dog  begets  offspring;  for  a  delicate  or  un- 
healthy dog  is  more  than  likely  to  transmit  his  defects  to  his  puppies,  who 
are  in  consequence  more  difficult  to  rear,  and  of  less  value  when  they  at- 
tain maturity.  Considerable  attention  should  therefore  be  paid  to  the 
comfort  of  a  dog  who  is  in  the  habit  of  receiving  a  large  number  of  stud 
visits.  He  should,  if  possible,  be  well  exercised  morning  and  evening,  either 
by  a  country  walk,  or  a  run  round  his  owner's  yard;  and  his  diet  must  be 
wholesome  and  liberal.  Stud  dogs  should  never  be  used  during  the  heat 
of  the  day,  whatever  the  exigencies  may  be.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind, 
too,  that  it  is  always  well  to  have  your  stud  dogs  look  clean  and  tidy, 
both  when  out  of  doors  and  when  in  the  kennels.  Much  depends  upon  the 
first  impressions  formed  by  the  owner  of  a  bitch  who  contemplates  breeding 
from  him,  and  many  a  dog  is  passed  over  whose  services,  had  he  been  in 
better  fettle,  might  have  been  resorted  to.  Care  should  be  taken  not  to 
overtax  the  energies  of  a  young  sire  by  allowing  him  to  receive  too  many 
visits;  the  result  of  excesses  in  this  way  being  both  sickly  offspring  and 
his  own  ultimate  failure  at  the  stud.  Fifteen  or  twenty  bitches  a  year  are 
quite  enough  for  a  dog  not  in  his  prime,  and  about  twice  the  number  for 
a  dog  in  the  full  vigor  of  his  strength.  As  a  rule,  dogs  under  eighteen 
months  old  are  not  likely  to  do  themselves  or  their  owners  much  good  if 
bred  from;  and  availing  one's  self  of  the  services  of  a  very  old  dog  is  always 
risky.  It  is  extremely  hard  to  state  an  age  at  which  a  dog  can  be  said  to 
be  "old;"  some  retain  the  vigor  of  their  youth  up  to  ten  years  and  more, 
whilst  others  get  decript  and  break  up  at  six  or  seven.  So  much  depends 
upon  constitution  and  careful  attendance  that  it  is  impossible  to  advise  upon 
the  age  at  which  a  stud  dog  ceases  to  be  of  use;  but  breeders  should  see 
the  dog  for  themselves,  if  they  do  not  know  him,  and  judge  from  his  ap- 
pearance and  condition,  whether  he  is  likely  to  suit  their  wishes. 

In  this  age  of  bench  show  celebrities  the  precautions  necessary  to  ob- 
tain the  best  results  are  too  often  neglected  in  the  case  of  a  stud  dog  on 
which  there  is  a  big  run,  and  doubtless,  carelessness  in  looking  after  the 
bitch  is  responsible  for  a  good  many  "misses." 

A  sire  should  be  looked  upon  with  suspicion  if  his  services  are  in  too 
great  request,  and  the  number  of  his  receptions  unlimited,  as  it  is  only 
reasonable  to  expect  sickly  offspring  from  a  dog  whose  stud  experiences 
are  practically  unrestricted.  A  very  old  dog,  unless  mated  to  a  young  and 
vigorous  bitch,  is  more  than  likely  to  fail  to  get  stock  at  all;  and  if  he 
succeeds  in  doing  so,  the  puppies  are  very  frequently  of  bad  constitution 
and  delicate  in  their  earlier  days.  It  is  often  the  case  that  the  services 
of  a  successful  show  dog  are  most  eagerly  sought  after  by  breeders,  and 
the  merits  of  his  father  entirely  overlooked;  and  this  is  certainly  a  fact 
which  must  puzzle  all  practical  men  when  they  reflect  upon  it.  A  good  sire 
of  good  pedigree,  who  can  produce  stock  of  superior  quality  to  himself,  is 
better  worth  patronizing  at  a  low  fee  than  his  successful  son  who  has  yet 
to  prove  himself  the  success  at  the  stud  which  he  is  on  the  bench  or  in 
the  field;  especially  as  in  the  latter  instance  the  sum  charged  for  his  ser- 
vices is  sure  to  be  a  considerable  one.  Many  of  our  champion  dogs  have 
turned  out  complete  failures  from  a  breeder's  point  of  view;   while  their 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  271 

plainer  looking  fathers  or  brothers  have  begotten  offspring  of  a  far  better 
stamp,  though  with  only  half  the  chances  of  success. 

A  stud  fee  is  for  the  service  of  the  dog  to  the  bitch,  irrespective  of 
whether  any  puppies  result  from  the  union  or  not,  unless  special  arrange- 
ments have  been  previously  made  between  the  owner  of  stud  dog  and  brood 
bitch,  varying  that  accepted  custom,  or  the  dog  should  be  proved  a  non- 
stock getter,  in  which  case  the  latter  may  claim  back  any  fee  paid.  After 
the  visit  they  should  both  be  fed  and  put  away  in  a  separate  kennel.  A 
bitch  that  has  visited  the  dog  should  not  be  sent  on  a  railway  journey  the 
same  day. 

Bitches  Sent  for  Service. — On  the  arrival  of  a  bitch  for  service,  the 
owner  of  the  stud  dog  should,  unless  time  is  a  matter  of  consideration, 
fasten  her  up  securely  and  let  her  recover  from  the  fatigues  of  her  journey 
before  the  introduction  takes  place.  A  night's  rest  and  a  feed  are  very  likely 
to  assist  Natures'  course,  a  bitch  served  immediately  after  a  tiring  journey 
being  far  more  likely  to  miss  conception  than  one  who  has  rested  and  be- 
come a  little  accustomed  to  the  place  and  those  around  her.  Many  bitches 
are  very  troublesome  and  restive  when  with  the  dog,  and  throw"  them- 
selves about  in  a  violent  manner;  others  are  savage  and  morose,  and  if 
not  carefully  looked  after  are  likely  to  fly  at  him  and  perhaps  do  some 
serious  injury.  In  such  cases  the  bitch  must  be  held  by  the  collar,  but  care 
should  be  taken  that  she  does  not  get  half  suffocated  by  too  tight  a  grasp 
being  placed  on  it.  The  possibility  of  a  fight  taking  place,  or  of  the  dog 
requiring  some  assistance,  especially  in  the  case  of  young  bitches,  make  it 
undesirable  that  the  pair  should  be  left  alone  together  for  any  length  of. 
time,  much  less  after  connection  has  terminated. 

After  union  it  is  some  time  before  the  animals  can  be  separated; 
twenty  minutes  is  about  the  average,  though,  of  course,  this  period  is  often 
exceeded  or  decreased  in  duration.  After  that  the  breeder  must  wait  pa- 
tiently for  Nature  to  take  its  course,  when  the  bitch  should  be  kennelled 
by  herself  on  straw,  and  kept  as  quiet  as  possible.  It  is  desirable  that 
a  second  visit  should,  if  possible,  be  paid  after  an  interval  of  thirty-six  or 
forty-eight  hours.  The  majority  of  the  owners  of  stud  dogs  gladly  con- 
sent to  this  arrangement,  as  it  lessens  the  chances  of  the  bitch  proving  bar- 
ren, and  also  saves  them  trouble,  and  their  dogs  from  getting  a  bad  name 
as  a  stock  getter. 

When  you  get  your  bitch  home,  she  is  very  likely  to  be  yet  in  season, 
as  being  served  generally  prolongs  the  season  for  a  few  days — and  you  must 
now  be  very  careful  that  no  other  dog  gets  at  her,  which  might  spoil  all 
that  was  done. 


KENNEL  SUGGESTIONS 


Quite  a  number  of  the  following  have  been  written  by  Harry  W.  Lacy, 
Editor  of  the  American  Fancier,  a  mair  who  understands  dogs  and  their 
care,  which  he  learned  in  England — and  I  have  saved  these  up,  as  much 
benefit  can  be  derived  therefrom,  as  well  as  "Kennel  Dont's,"  which  fol- 
lows this. 

A  number  of  suggestions  for  the  care  of  dogs  have  been  made  from 
time  to  time  in  "Notes  for  Novices"  in  Our  Dogs  (Eng.),  and  in  them 
there  is  a  great  deal  to  be  learned  in  the  way  of  detail  by  every  novice 
who  starts  to  keep  a  dog  or  dogs.  Incessant  watching  for  and  proper  at- 
tention to  those  little  matters  count  for  much  more  than  one  would  think 
at  first  sight.  But  the  experienced  fancier  knows  the  value  of  those  extra 
attentions,  and  his  knowledge  can  be  seen  in  the  general  appearance  of 


272  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

his  dogs,  whereas  the  new  beginner  is  often  too  fond  of  leaving  servants 
and  other  disinterested  persons  matters  which  he  should  attend  to  himself. 

Take,  for  instance,  the  matter  of  feeding.  How  many  dog  owners 
there  are  (especially  in  the  upper  class  of  society)  who  never  give  the  least 
attention  to  their  dog's  feeding,  leaving  it  entirely  to  others,  and  only 
waking  up  now  and  again  when  something  has  gone  wrong.  Feeding,  if 
left  to  any  careless  person  who  chances  to  be  employed  about  the  premises, 
is  certain  to  be  irregular  and  unsatisfactory,  and  every  owner  ought  to 
consider  it  his  bounden  duty  to  superintend  regularly  the  feeding  of  his 
dumb  friends. 

Many  dogs  are  given — especially  when  hungry — to  "bolting"  their  food. 
This  is  a"  bad  habit,  and  is  sure  to  have  an  ill  effect  sooner  or  later.  To 
prevent  a  dog  from  habitually  doing  this  it  is  best  to  give  him,  before  his 
proper  meal,  a  hard,  dry  biscuit.  This  will  take  off,  as  it  were,  the  edge 
of  appetite  and  so,  when  the  usual  basin  is  given,  it  will  be  consumed 
more  moderately. 

Large  bones  should  be  regularly  given  to  dogs,  because  they  act  splen- 
didly as  cleaners  to  the  teeth,  the  rasping  of  every  vestige  of  meat  doing 
this  most  effectually.  Large  bones  only  should  be  given,  because  if  too 
small  the  dog  will  crunch  them  up  and  swallow  them,  which  is  dangerous. 

The  best  way  to  give  a  pill  to  a  dog  is  to  sew  it  up  in  a  piece  of  meat. 
Then  tossing  the  animal  one  or  two  pieces  of  similar  size,  which  are  at 
once  bolted,  the  piece  containing  the  pill  may  follow  successfully.  It  is 
important  that  from  first  to  last  the  dog  be  kept  ignorant  of  what  he  is 
taking.     Once  bitten,  twice  shy  applies   here. 

So  the  pill  or  powder  must  be  well  concealed.  In  giving  a  liquid, 
instead  of  forcing  open  the  jaws  and  pouring  the  liquid  into  the  mouth, 
where  it  will  remain  and  half  choke  the  creature,  since  he  can  not  swallow 
while  his  mouth  is  wide  open,  it  is  much  better  to  use  the  lower  part  of  the 
lips  as  a  sort  of  funnel  and  slowly  pour  the  medicine  into  that,  when 
it  will  be  impossible  for  the  dog  to  avoid  swallowing  it. 

Many  fanciers — novices  that  is — experience  a  great  deal  of  trouble 
in  physicking  their  dogs,  simply  from  want  of  knowledge  of  how  to  go 
about  it,  and  it  often  happens  more  harm  is  done  to  the  dog  by  the  strug- 
gling and  fright  than  good  by  the  medicine;  and  not  only  so,  but  it  is  well 
nigh  impossible  to  give  a  proper  dose  unless  the  dog  is  kept  absolutely 
quiet,  and  that  only  can  be  when  either  the  medicine  is  tasteless  or  the 
administrator  of  it  skillful. 

If  a  person  wants  a  dog  for  a  pet  only,  he  can  make  a  pet  or  a  genial 
companion  of  any  of  the  recognized  breeds,  and  his  accomplishments  will 
only  be  limited  by  the  amount  of  companionship  and  education  granted 
him,  and  your  choice  should  be  based  simply  on  choosing  a  breed  you 
most  admire.  Your  choice  of  a  companion  rests  also  with  you.  Different 
men  admire  different  kinds  of  companions. 

Hot  Weather  on  Uogs. — Every  provision  should  be  made  during  the 
heated  season  to  protect  the  dogs,  especially  suckling  puppies.  Whereas  a 
dry  cellar  is  convenient,  it  is  a  good  plan  during  the  extreme  heat  of  the 
day  to  make  arrangements  for  their  comfort  in  this  cool  retreat. 

Particular  attention  should  be  paid  to  providing  cool  and  frequent 
changes  of  drinking  water.  Water  placed  in  porous  earthenware  pots 
will  be  found  to  keep  cooler  and  sweeter  than  in  metal  vessels,  and  these 
should  be  washed  out  thoroughly  every  day.  The  intelligent  kennel  man- 
ager will  always  provide  artificial  shade  in  kennel  yards  when  Nature  has 
not  done  so,  and  it  is  well  to  have  awnings  over  kennel  windows  and  doors. 
Exercise  only  during  the  early  morning  hours  and  in  the  evening,  the  rest 
of  the  day  let  the  dogs  lie  quietly.  In  arranging  kennels  it  is  always  a 
good  plan  to  build  the  kennel  floor  two  or  three  feet  from  the  ground. 
This  space  makes  an  admirable  retreat  in  hot  weather  and,  admitting  of 
a  free  current  of  air  at  all  times,  provided  the  kennels  are  built  on  a  natur- 
al drainage  slope,  there  is  no  fear  of  a  damp  kennel  floor  in  winter,  which, 
for  obvious  reasons,  is  a  serious  defect  in  kennel  architecture. 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  873 

During  very  hot  weather  it  would  be  well  to  remove  all  bedding  from 
under  litters  of  very  young  puppies.  Place  them  on  the  floor  so  the  air 
can  circulate  around  them.  During  this  trying  season  the  young  puppies, 
must  be  kept  as  cool  as  possible  or  they  will  go  under.  A  big  lump  of 
ice  placed  in  the  shade  of  the  window-sill  will  help  cool  the  atmosphere 
in  the  kennels. 

Care — Diet — Nursing. — Absolute  cleanliness,  an  unfailing  supply  of 
fresh  air,  a  suitable  temperature,  plenty  of  fresh  water,  general  comfort, 
and  last  but  not  least,  companionship  is  needed  by  a  sick  dog.  Locking 
a  dog  in  a  darkened  room  or  stall,  or  any  unaccustomed  change,  will  work 
havoc  with  a  sick  dog.  He  wants  to  see  his  master,  he  relies  upon  his 
companionship,  and  he  turns  to  him  as  if  to  a  god,  with  a  sublime  confi- 
dence in  his  master's  ability  to  help  him  in  his  difficulty.  A  word  of  ap- 
probation is  worth  more  to  his  nervous  system  than  drugs,  and  he  will 
frequently  eat  and  take  nourishment  simply  to  please  his  master. 

Dogs  have  sensitive  stomachs,  and  often,  as  a  result  of  indigestion, 
refuse  to  eat  altogether.  In  these  cases  this  is  Nature's  method  of  work- 
ing a  cure. 

If  the  dog  is  down  with  some  febrile  disorder  that  is  rapidly  weaken- 
ing him  it  is  important  that  he  take  some  nourishment.  Necessarily  it  must 
be  of  the  lightest  and  most  sustaining  character. 

Medical  practitioners  and  trained  nurses  have  brought  the  dietary  of 
the  sick  room  up  to  a  perfection  that  the  canine  practitioner  can  study 
with   good   results. 

There  are  a  number  of  predigested  foods  easy  of  preparation,  nour- 
ishing and  sustaining.  Milk,  mutton  broth,  gelatine  and  raw  eggs  are  val- 
uable foods.  Boiled  rice  is  easy  of  digestion.  Raw  beef  or  mutton,  minced 
or  chopped  fine,  fed  a  few  teaspoonfuls  at  a  time,  will  act  in  many  cases  as 
a  tonic  to  an  exhausted  stomach,  and  should  be  resorted  to,  as  there  is 
always  danger  of  a  disordered  stomach  rebelling  against  too  long  contin- 
ued liquid  food.  A  few  teaspoonfuls  of  brandy  or  port  wine  will  frequently 
cause  the  stomach  to  retain  food  that  would  otherwise  be  rejected.  It  is 
best  given  in  the  form  of  an  egg-nog  and  fed  a  few  teaspoonfuls  at  a  time. 

A  dog  will  eat  small  quantities  of  food  offered  from  his  master's  hand 
when  he  will  refuse  it  from  a  dish.  Do  not  allow  a  pan  of  food  to  remain 
before  him  after  he  has  declined  to  eat.  Remove  it  at  once  and  offer  it  at 
some   future  time. 

Conduct  of  Dogs  in  the  Show  King — Of  far  more  importance  than  is 
often  thought  to  be  the  case,  is  the  conduct  of  a  dog  when  before  the  judge. 
A  dog  to  be  seen  at  his  best  on  the  eventful  day  should  have  some  little 
preliminary  training.  It  is  one  thing  to  have  a  decent  specimen,  and  quite 
another  for  it  to  comport  itself  so  that  the  judge  can  take  in  at  a  glance, 
and  with  the  least  possible  delay,  the  chief  points.  A  dog  that  will  not 
show  itself  to  advantage  is  at  an  obvious  disadvantage  with  one  that  knows 
the  business  thoroughly,  and  whose  owner  is  able  to  display  all  his  strong 
points  without  unduly  exposing  his  weak  ones.  Old  show  hands  know 
this  very  well,  as  any  one  may  see  for  himself  by  watching  attentively 
the  expert  handlers  at  a  show  like  the  New  York  Show.  There  are  some 
judges  who  will  take  a  lot  of  pains  to  get  a  nervous  dog  to  show  himself, 
but  there  are  others,  having  heavy  classes  to  judge,  who  cannot  bestow  the 
time  necessary  to  get  each  individual  dog  in  the  best  humor  to  show 
himself. 

Such  being  the  case,  it  is,  too,  politic  of  an  owner  to  either  take  the 
dog  into  the  ring  himself,  or  else  leave  it  to  someone  who  is  an  expert  in  the 
business,  or  that  the  dog  knows  perhaps  as  well  as  its  owner.  All  owners 
cannot,  of  course,  keep  a  kennelman,  or  indeed,  accompany  their  charges; 
but  if  a  valuable  dog  is  being  shown  it  Is  not  wise  to  leave  it  to  a  perfect 
stranger  to  "handle"  the  animal.  There  are  a  number  of  expert  handlers 
at  every  show,  and  the  novice  that  has  a  good  dog  and  cannot  conven- 


$74  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING   DOGS. 

iently  attend  himself  would  find  it  to  pay  him  to  enlist  the  services  of  one 
of  these  professionals.  Where  there  is  no  one  deputized  to  act  the  part 
of  handler,  it  is  left  to  the  keepers  to  bring  in  the  dog.  Naturally  the  dog 
will  not  show  himself  for  these  men  as  it  would  for  its  owner  or  some 
one  fully  conversant  with  show  ring  business,  and  suffers  accordingly.  Dogs 
are  highly  sensitive  animals,  and  often  when  sent  away  without  any  previous 
preparation  look  and  really  are  dejected. 

The  person,  therefore,  who  aspires  to  be  an  exhibitor,  and  to  get  every 
advantage  possible  out  of  his  or  her  dog,  will  be  well  advised  to  rehearse 
a  few  times  the  actual  business  of  the  show  ring. 

Take  your  pups  out  into  the  road  early,  to  accustom  them  to  curious 
sights  and  sounds,  it  makes  all  the  difference  at  their  first  show. 

Accustom  them  to  follow  you  without  lead  early,  also  to  have  on  a 
collar,  and  to  lead  nicely.  This  cannot  be  done  in  a  field  or  garden  they 
know  well,  or  they  will  scream  and  crouch,  but  in  a  road  or  quiet  street 
they  will  pay  more  attention   to  you. 

I  would  particularly  impress  on  all  who  own  dogs — especially  young 
owners — that  it  is  not  only  to  their  interest,  but  it  is  their  duty  to  be  true 
masters,  ruling  with  firmness  and  kindness,  and  providing  for  all  the  wants 
of  the  animal  in  lodging,  food,  and  exercise  on  principles  of  common  sense; 
and  it  must  be  evident  that  thus  only  can  health  be  maintained.  If  a  dog 
have  not  proper  food  provided  at  proper  times,  but  be  allowed  to  be  the 
scavenger  of  the  yard  and  the  street,  what  wonder  if  he  become  loathsome 
and  diseased,  a  nuisance  to  his  owner  and  everyone  else?  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  he  be  pampered,  petted,  and  stuffed  with  tit-bits  and  sweet 
cakes,  he  will  lose  all  kindliness  of  disposition  (the  great  charm  of  a 
companion  dog),  and  become  a  morose,  peevish,  snappish  misanthrope,  that 
your  friends  may  praise,  but  dare  not  pat;  he  will  lose  all  beauty  of  form, 
all  sprightliness  and  elasticity  of  action  and  become  an  unshapely,  asthma- 
tical  lump  of  obesity,  to  whom  the  slightest  exertion  is  a  trouble.  Ladies, 
who  are  the  great  offenders  in  this  way  should  remember  that  dogs  are  not 
valued — like  prize  hogs — for  their  fatness,  and  that  they  are  never  so 
healthy  and  happy  as  when  in  good  working  condition — that  is,  when  they 
can  take  a  good  gallop  without  puffing. 


KENNEL    POINTS 


Don't  wash  a  bitch  while  in  season. 

Don't  breed  a  bitch  until  the  colored  discharge  has  ceased. 

Don't  breed  a  valuable  stud  dog  several  times  to  one  season.  One  ser- 
vice is  just  as  good  if  not  better  than  half  a  dozen. 

Don't  wash  the  bitch  while  in  whelp.  If  she  should  get  wet,  out  shoot- 
ing for  instance,  see  that  she  has  a  warm  bed  and  rug  her  down  before  she 
retires. 

Don't  give  your  dogs  hot  food;  it  is  not  natural,  injures  their  teeth 
and  leads  to  indigestion. 

Don't  prevent  a  bitch  that  is  in  whelp  from  eating  whatever  she 
pleases,  though  if  you  find  she  has  a  penchant  for  filthy  matter,  carrion  and 
other  flotsam  and  jetsam  of  the  street  let  her  have  her  way,  or  better  give 
her   sulphur  in   her   feed. 

Don't  send  your  bitches  into  water  while  in  whelp — at  any  rate  not 
after  the  fourth  week. 

Don't  keep  your  bitches  in  whelp  chained  up  or  kenneled  continually, 
they  should  have  plenty  of  gentle  walking  exercise  every  day,  especially 
the  last  three  weeks  before  whelping. 

Don't  neglect  to   feed  your  brood   bitches   with   every   food   that   will 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  275 

strengthen  and  stimulate  the  mother  in  the  trying  periods  of  pregnancy  and 
while  suckling  pups.  It  is  impossible  for  a  hen  to  cover  the  egg  meat  with 
hard  shell  unless  it  have  access  to  lime  and  other  shell  producing  matter. 
So  with  the  bitch;  when  her  puppies  are  required  to  show  bone  this  state 
is  greatly  aided  by  supplying  bone  producing  foods.  Precipitated  phosphate 
of  lime  should  be  given  to  the  bitch  in  her  food  during  the  last  weeks  of 
pregnancy  and  after  whelping  and  then  to  the  puppies  until  two  or  three 
months  old.     Half  a  teaspoonful  daily  to  a  pup  is  sufficient. 

Don't,  if  you  can  avoid  it,  keep  your  bitches  in  whelp  in  kennels  or 
jards  where  they  must  continually  jump  up  on  their  hind  legs  in  order  to 
lock  upon  thu  outer  world;  have  open  wire  or  slats  for  fencing  and  divis- 
ions. If  you  must  have  solid  partitions  build  them  so  high  that  the  bitch 
v  ill  never  attempt  to  jump  up  in  order  to  look  over.  More  puppies  are  slip- 
ped and  more  bitches  miss  from  this  abnormal  exercise  than  most  breed- 
ers  imagine. 

Don't  wash  a  dog  and  then  allow  it  to  run  around  and  dry  itself.  If 
you  take  enough  interest  in  the  dog  to  wash  it,  you  should  not  be  too  lazy 
to  dry  him  afterward. 

Don't  give  up  hope  of  a  sick  dog;  they  have  most  remarkable  recuper- 
ative powers  and  will  frequently  take  a  right  turn  when  least  expected. 

Don't  if  a  dog  is  doing  well  without  medicine,  force  it  on  him,  and, 
as  a  rule,  if  a  dog  is  resting  quietly  or  sleeping,  do  not  disturb  him  to  give 
him  medicine. 

Don't  in  buying  medicine,  be  satisfied  with  anything  but  the  very  best. 
Beware  of  cheap,  coarse  castor  oil,  adulterated  quinine  and  cod  liver  oil, 
and  it  may  also  be  stated  that  some  of  the  proprietary  medicines  on  the 
market  are  dangerous. 

Don't  guess  at  doses,   measure   them  carefully  and   if  the  medicine   is  ' 
to  be  given  at  night  keep  the  dog  confined   until  morning. 

Don't  expect  a  puppy  to  know  as  much  as  an  adult  dog. 

Don't  keep  a  dog  unless  you  are  fond  of  it.  , 

Don't  expect  to  house-break  a  pup  in  a  week. 

Dcr't  ill-use  him  because  he  does  not  understand  you. 

Don't  wait  too  long  to  break  him  to  chain  and  collar. 

Don't  think  that  a  dog  has  no  likes  or  dislikes. 

Don't  whip  him  if  he  barks  at  a  stranger,  and  never  kick  your  dog. 

Don't  allow  him  to  have  his  own  way,  but  be  firm  and  determined  with 
him,  using  only  enough  punishment  to  control  him,  if  you  can't  accomplish 
it  by  talking  to  him. 

Don't  allow  your  dog  to  stray  too  far  from  you  in  the  streets,  and 
make  him  obedient  to  call. 

Don't  allow  him  to  cross  the  street  unless  he  Is  near  to  you  for  fear 
of  being  run  over  by  an  auto  or  street  car. 

Don't  be  afraid  to  give  your  dog  plenty  of  exercise. 

Don't  feed  him  around   the   table. 

Don't  give  him  chicken  bones;   they  are  dangerous. 

Don't  ignore  his  instincts  and  think  that  he  can  live  on  starchy  foods 
alone. 

Don't  entertain  the  false  notion   that  meat  produces   fits   or  mange. 

Don't  give  him  a  taste  for  candies. 

Don't  worry  over  every  little  thing  that  appears  to  be  out  of  the  or- 
dinary in  your  dog.  There  are  days  when  you  don't  feel  well,  and  don't 
feel  like  playing.     It's  the  same  with  a  dog. 

Don't  treat  your  dogs   as   so   many  animals   that  have   to   be   fed   and 
housed.     We  cannot  understand  keeping  dogs  under  such  conditions.     Han- 
dle your  dogs,   make   friends   with   them,   because   they  are   dogs.      A  man  ' 
need  never  be  ashamed  of  loving  a  dog. 

Don't  lose  your  temper  and   kick  a  dog.     The  dog  is  apt  to  consider  . 
the  kicking  leg  an   enemy,  and   treat  it  as  such,  and  this  may  be  uncom- 
fortable for  you.     Besides,  a  kick  in  passion  may  do  an  irreparable  injury 
to  the  dog.     If  a  whip  must  be  used,  a  thin  rawhide  is  the  best;   it  hurts 
and  breaks  no  bones,  and  you  can  control  it  better  than  a  whiplash. 


276  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

Don't  wait  until  disease  has  gotten  so  secure  a  hold  that  it  cannot  be 
quickly  eradicated.  This  is  a  weakness  characteristic  of  a  great  many  dog- 
owners.  The  "go  off  and  eat  grass  and  get  well"  theory  doesn't  hold  good 
in  this  latter  day  civilization. 

Don't  administer  liquids  to  dogs  while  the  mouth  is  open.  Close  the 
mouth  tightly,  hold  the  hand  over  his  nose  and  lower  jaw,  and  by  making 
a  funnel  of  the  side  lips,  keep  the  head  erect  and  pour  the  liquid  through 
the  teeth. 

Don't  because  you  can  trust  your  house  pet  not  to  abuse  your  confi- 
dence, keep  him  shut  up  in  the  house  for  hours.  Some  dogs  are  so  refined 
in  their  habits  that  they  will  suffer  agonies  rather  than  take  advantage 
of  your  thoughtfulness. 

Don't  forget  that  where  a  number  of  dogs  are  kept,  regularity  and 
system  should  prevail.  Insist  that  your  kennelman  have  a  certain  hour 
for  exercising,  grooming,  and  especially  feeding.  Slip-shod  methods  are 
just  as  productive  of  non-success  in  dog-breeding  as  in  any  other  business 
undertaking.  With  regular  hours  for  different  work,  the  dogs  become  set- 
tled in  their  habits,  are  not  continually  restless  and  on  the  move;  con- 
sequently there  is  little  noise  and  the  neighbors  are  not  disturbed. 

Don't,  if  you  can  help  it,  cook  the  kennel  food  in  the  same  building 
occupied  by  the  dogs.  The  aroma  of  cooking  unsettles  them  and  the  spirit 
of  anxious  expectancy  is  often  the  forerunner  of  a  fight,  when  a  number 
of  dogs  are  kept  in  one  compartment. 

Don't  feed  cornmeal  day  in  and  day  out,  as  many  kennelmen  unfor- 
tunately do.  It  is  handy  to  cook  and  cheap,  you  say.  It  may  be,  but  its 
constant  use  heats  the  blood,  lowers  the  system  and  eczema  and  mange 
too  often  follow  as  a  natural  consequence.     Never  feed  it  in  hot  weather. 

Don't  allow  your  very  young  puppies  to  run  with  the  old  dogs.  Be- 
sides the  danger  from  injury  in  romping  with  heavier  dogs  there  is  also 
a  danger  of  the  older  dogs  snapping  at  the  youngsters  and  giving  them 
a  nip  that  will  scare  the  life  out  of  them  for  a  week  or  longer. 

Don't,  in  your  eagerness  to  show  off  the  gameness  of  some  two  or 
three  months  old  terrier  enter  him  at  a  rat.  A  nip  from  the  rodent,  that 
he  does  not  understand,  will  sometimes  ruin  a  very  young  dog  for  future 
ratting. 

Don't  throw  a  dog  into  water  because  he  does  not  plunge  in  at  com- 
mand. If  you  do,  ten  to  one  you  will  spoil  his  future  as  a  water  dog. 
Coax  him  to  walk  in  by  degrees,  but  better  still,  if  possible,  let  him  see 
some  other  dog  swim  out  for  the  stick;  if  not  an  inveterate  coward  he  will 
soon  enter  into  the  fun  of  the  thing — and   the  water. 

Don't  feed  liver  and  lights  to  your  dogs  if  you  value  their  health.  Such 
Btuff  may  fill  an  aching  void  for  the  time  being,  but  there  is  no  flesh  pro- 
ducing substance  in  it.  The  liver  will  disarrange  the  internals  and  you 
may  as  well  feed  so  much  sponge  as  the  leathery  indigestible  lights. 

Don't  forget  the  bones.  Dogs  kept  in  kennels  have  not  as  a  rule  a  very 
merry  time  of  it  at  best  and  a  good  big  knuckle  bone  will  serve  to  while 
away  an  odd  hour  or  two,  besides  cleaning  the  teeth  and  inducing  a  healthy 
flow  of  saliva.     But  use  discretion,  avoiding  chicken  bones  and  small  bones. 

Don't  throw  in  one  bone  for  two  dogs.  Reason  obvious. .  Neither  give 
a  bone  to  bitches  suckling  or  running  with  puppies.  The  maternal  instinct 
is  strong  but  the  mother  while  gnawing  the  bone  is  not  to  be  depended 
upon  and  may  give  a  too  venturesome  and  confiding  puppy  an  ugly  bite. 

Don't  provide  high  sleeping  benches  for  bitches  in  whelp,  the  lower 
the  better  so  that  they  may  be  no  danger  of  incurring  a  strain  which  may 
cause  a  miscarriage.  Have  the  entrance  to  the  brood  bitch  kennel  as  wide 
as  possible  and  easy  of  access,  with  no  corners  to  run  round,  when  running 
in  or  out  in  a  hurry  the  bitch  is  liable  to  bump  herself.  And  above  all 
things  avoid  swinging  doors. 

Don't  neglect  ventilation  in  the  kennels.  Arrange  this  so  that  there 
is  no  direct  draught  on  the  dogs.  A  good  plan  is  to  have  openings  under 
tie  eaves  of  the  kennel  and  inside  nail  a  board  the  size  of  the  aperture 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING.  DOGS.  27T 

but  slanting  inwards  at  an  angle  of  45  degrees  so  that  the  air  is  direct©* 
to  the  top  of  the  kennel  first. 

Don't  feed  raw  meat  to  a  dog  suffering  from  diarrhea.  Feed  starchy 
foods.  A  good  stiff  gruel  of  flour  and  water  will  often  stop  the  complaint 
in   early  stages. 

Don't  think  that  your  duty  is  done  when  you  have  provided  kennel 
runs  for  your  dogs.  This  fact  will  not  always  answer  the  exercising  pur- 
pose. The  dogs  will  probably  lie  around  and  take  a  toddle  now  and  again, 
but  no  real  exercise.  Therefore  they  should  be  given  opportunity  for  a 
scamper  at  least  once  a  day.  This  is  always  feasible  in  the  country  and 
really  no  dogs  should  be  kept  in  the  city,  except  household  pets,  and  these 
can  always  be  given  a  run  when  you  walk,  if  you  care  to  take  the  trouble 
■ — some  people  don't,  and  the  dogs  suffer. 

Don't  allow  the  kennel  yards  to  become  littered  with  manure.  Besides 
being  unhealthy  and  a  source  of  worms,  the  manure  is  a  saleable  commo- 
dity and  should  be  regularly  taken  up,  dried  and  sold  to  the  morocco 
leather  dressers.  The  bones  that  accumulate  around  a  kennel  can  also  be 
disposed  of.     All  these  little  things  count  in  the  conduct  of  a  large  kennel. 

Don't  feed  scraps  from  the  table  without  carefully  looking  them  over 
before  doing  so.  In  the  dog's  eagerness  after  dainties  he  may  swallow  a 
hidden  fish  bone,  chicken  bone  splinter  or  other  pointed  substance  that  may 
cause  trouble  afterwards.  Also  don't  feed  highly  seasoned  messes  that 
come  from  the  table  just  because  they  are  handy  and  the  dog  will  eat  them. 
It  will  cost  you  less  in  the  long  run  to  feed  sound  wholesome  dog  food. 

Don't  use  the  whip  for  every  little  mistake  your  dog  makes.  Dogs  are 
not  like  lions  in  a  cage,  to  be  subdued  by  a  show  of  force.  Talk  to  the  dog 
and  prove  to  him  by  action  and  expression  that  he  has  done  wrong.  A  dog 
follows  his  master's  expression  more  than  you  may  think  he  does.  Kind- 
ness and   firmness  accomplish   more   than   the  lash. 

Don't  lose  your  temper  and  kick  a  dog.  The  dog  is  apt  to  consider 
the  kicking  leg  an  enemy  and  treat  it  as  such,  and  this  may  be  uncomforta- 
ble for  you.  Besides  a  kick  in  passion  may  do  an  irreparable  injury  to  the 
dog.  If  a  whip  must  be  used  a  thin  rawhide  is  the  best;  it  hurts  and  breaks 
no  bones,  and  you  can  control  it  better  than  a  whip  lash. 

Don't  enter  a  kennel  without  speaking  to  the  dogs,  and  especially  so  at 
night,  or  in  the  dark.  The  magic  power  of  the  voice  may  save  you  from  a 
bite.  When  meeting  a  strange  dog  always  greet  him  kindly.  A  soft  word 
will  answer  better  than  your  boot.  And  don't  thrink  from  a  dog  that  jumps 
or  runs  toward  you,  this  is  an  exhibition  of  fear  that  he  is  apt  to  take  advan- 
tage of,  and  above  all  things  don't  run  away  from  him. 

Don't  fail  to  frequently  examine  your  dog's  mouth.  Teeth  may  become 
loose,  and  thereby  interfere  with  his  eating;  tartar  may  form  when  sloppy, 
unsuitable  food  is  given,  and  especially  in  the  case  of  pet  dogs,  lap  dogs, 
and  so  forth,  that  are  fed  not  wisely  but  too  well,  and  this  should  be  either 
brushed  away  or  scraped.  Small  slivers  of  bone  are  apt  to  run  in  between 
the  gum  and  tooth;  if  not  removed,  the  gum  will  ulcerate  and  become  very 
painful,  preventing  the  dog  from  eating,  and  while  in  this  off-of-feed  con- 
dition, you  may  deem  it  proper  to  doctor  him  for  some  imaginary  illness 
when  a  little  examination  would  show  you  the  cause  of  the  trouble. 

Don't  exercise  your  dog  after  a  meal,  nor  yet  just  before  it.  How 
would  you  like  to  run  half  a  mile  after  a  good  feed? 

Don't  feed  sloppy  food  to  the  dogs;  that  soft  of  stuff  may  be  all  right 
to  fill  pigs  with,  but  a  dog's  grinders  were  made  for  something  more 
substantial.  If  you  are  a  father  you  will  know  it  is  customary  to  give 
teething  babies  something  to  use  their  gums  on.  Puppies  are  four-legged 
babies,  and  they  require  similar  treatment  when  teething.  Chuck  the  puppy 
a  bone  or  a  biscuit  and  that  will  help  the  grinders  along. 

Don't  think  because  you  know  what  you  wish  your  dog  to  do  that 
he  can  grasp  your  meaning  off-hand  and  without  effort  on  your  part;  dogs 
are  intelligent,  but  they  are  not  clairvoyants. 

Don't  buy  drugs  in  great  quantities  as  they  become  inert  or  greatly 
deteriorate  by  keeping,  especially  when  exposed  to  light  and  air;  therefor*, 


278  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

buy  such  drugs  only  in  quantities  for  immediate  use,  and  from  those  whose 
judgment  in  selection  and  whose  fair  dealing  can  be  depended  on. 

Don't  treat  your  dogs  as  simply  so  many  animals  that  have  to  be  fed 
and  housed.  We  can  not  understand  keeping  dogs  under  such  conditions. 
Handle  your  dogs,  make  friends  with  them,  because  they  are  dogs.  A  man 
need  never  be  ashamed  of  loving  a  dog.  The  dog's  whole-souled  look  of 
affection  will  repay  the  man  of  feeling  for  all  the  trouble  he  may  put  himself 
to  in  this  direction,  and  it  will  last  longer  than  a  good  many  other  loves.  If 
you  want  to  win  prizes  with  them,  accustom  them  to  being  handled  and 
to  show  themselves  off  to  the  best  advantage.  Nothing  makes  an  owner 
look  so  foolish  as  to  try  and  show  a  dog  that  does  not  know  him  or  that 
is  "contrary."  A  good  puppy  is  often  placed  back  because  he  is  taken 
into  the  ring  without  any  thought  of  preparation  for  the  trying  ordeal. 
Accustom  your  dogs  to  being  shown  up  in  collar  and  chain.  They  soon 
grasp  the  idea,  for  there  is  vanity  in  dogs  as  well  as  human  beings. 

Don't  wash  puppies  when  they  are  very  young,  unless  they  happen  to 
get  into  some  filth  that  can  not  be  removed  when  dry  by  the  brush.  Don't 
wash  puppies  until  at  least  six  months  old.  Grooming  and  "elbow  grease" 
every  day  will  improve  the  coat  and  do  more  good  than  washing. 

Don't  let  your  pup,  or  pups,  get  into  the  habit  of  barking  violently, 
a  most  tiresome  trick,  coming  of  idleness  and  not  enough  out  door  exer- 
cise, and  also  sometimes  hereditary. 

Scold  them,  and  keep  a  switch  in  the  corner,  for  a  nip  now  and  then; 
they  will  soon  pay  attention. 


BREEDING 


breeding — This  article  was  written  by  Harry  W.  Lacy,  Kennel  Editor 
of  American  Fancier,  especially  for  this  book: 

"Young  bitches  often  exhibit  symptoms  of  an  inclination  to  breed  at 
the  age  of  eight  or  nine  months,  but  it  is  not  advisable  to  do  so  until  they 
have  come  in  season  the  second  time.  Remarks  we  made  last  week  against 
the  advisability  of  resorting  to  the  services  of  too  young  a  sire  apply  with 
even  greater  force  when  a  youthful  bitch  is  under  consideration.  Stunted 
and  puny  puppies  are  almost  sure  to  be  produced  from  a  young  mother; 
and  the  injury  they  are  likely  to  do  her  constitution  is  incalculable.  It 
must  be  borne  in  mind  that  for  weeks  before  birth  her  system  is  sorely 
taxed  to  provide  them  with  nourishment,  and  after  the  shock  of  labor  is 
gone  through  there  is  further  strain  upon  her  until  they  are  weaned. 

"The  first  symptoms  afforded  by  a  bitch  that  she  is  likely  to  be  soon 
ready  for  breeding  purposes  is  a  desire  on  her  part  to  romp  and  play  with 
any  dog  she  meets.  This  may  possibly  arise  from  merely  exuberance  of 
spirits,  but  it  is  always  well  to  keep  a  close  eye  upon  her  as  soon  as  any 
undue  levity  is  observed  in  her  conduct.  It  is  most  desirable  to  use  every 
endeavor  to  keep  the  animal  away  from  all  risk  of  being  got  at  by  strange 
dogs;  and  when  the  matter  is  placed  beyond  doubt  all  former  precautions 
should  be  doubled  if  possible.  It  must  be  remembered  that  there  is  not  only 
a  great  risk  of  dogs  getting  into  the  place  where  the  bitch  is  confined,  but 
that  she  will  probably  be  equally  anxious  to  escape  from  her  kennel,  and 
some  bitches  have  performed  almost  incredible  feats  in  their  endeavors  to 
do  so. 

"She  should,  if  at  a  distance,  be  sent  off  to  the  kennels  where  the 
dog  is  standing,  a  day  or  two  after  the  earlier  symptoms  appear,  so  as  to 
be  In  time.  If  despatched  by  public  conveyance,  it  is  imperative  that  she 
be  securely  confined  in  a  box  or  basket  from  which  escape  is  impossible. 
AH  breeders  should  be  impressed  with  the  absolute  necessity  of  exercising 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  27ft 

the  greatest  vigilance  when  they  have  bitches  by  them  under  such  cir- 
cumstances. For  several  days  after  the  bitch  has  visited  the  dog,  the  pre- 
cautions for  isolating  her  must  not  be  relaxed,  or  all  her  owner's  hopes 
may  be  marred  by  her  forming  a  connection  with  a  stranger. 

"Having  selected  a  proper  mate  for  his  bitch,  and  sent  her  to  him,  all 
anxiety  is  removed  from  an  owner's  mind  for  some  time  at  least;  for  dur- 
ing the  first  period  of  going  with  young,  the  bitch  will  require  no  special 
diet  or  attention.  During  the  latter  portion  of  her  pregnancy  she  is  pecu- 
liarly liable  to  chills;  every  care  should  therefore  be  taken  to  avoid  any 
risk  of  her  taking  cold,  and  all  washing  operations  and  violent  exercise 
must  then  be  suspended.  Our  own  experience  has  taught  us  that  in  the 
majority  of  instances  it  is  almost  impossible  to  tell  whether  or  no  the  bitch 
is  in  whelp  until  the  third  or  fourth  week,  and  on  many  occasions  we 
have  known  breeders  to  be  in  doubt  for  a  much  longer  period. 

"A  week  or  so  before  the  date  on  which  it  is  expected  that  she  will 
whelp,  the  bitch  should  be  installed  in  the  quarters  in  which  it  is  arrang- 
ed the  interesting  event  is  to  take  place.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  dogs 
must  get  used  to  a  kennel  before  they  will  make  themselves  at  home  in  it, 
and  this  feeling  is  peculiarly  perceptible  in  the  case  of  a  bitch  who  has 
recently  whelped;  for  in  many  cases  she  will  try  and  carry  her  puppies 
(greatly  to  the  damage  of  the  latter)  back  to  her  old  quarters  rather  than 
let  them  remain  in  a  kennel  to  which  she  is  unaccustomed.  Having  got 
her  reconciled  to  her  change  of  abode,  the  locale  of  which  should,  if  possible, 
be  away  from  the  other  dogs,  so  as  to  let  her  have  more  quiet  (but  warmth 
and  absence  of  draught  are  even  more  essential  than  isolation  in  most 
cases),  and  supposing  the  time  of  her  whelping  to  be  near  at  hand,  it  is 
desirable  that  the  bitch  should  be  provided  with  a  diet  of  a  more  strength- 
ening character  than  that  which  she  has  been  in  the  habit  of  receiving. 
This  need  not  consist  entirely  of  meat  or  other  heating  foods,  which  can 
only  tend  to  increase  her  discomfort  in  parturition,  but  may  be  made  of 
scraps  well  boiled  or  stewed,  with  the  addition  of  bread,  meal,  or  rice,  which 
in  their  turn  will  absorb  the  gravy  or  soup  and  form,  in  conjunction  with 
the  scraps,  when  the  latter  are  chopped  up,  a  meal  which  is  both  whole- 
some and  nutritious.  A  few  days  before  the  puppies  make  their  appear- 
ance a  considerable  change  is  usually  perceptible  in  the  bitch;  the  pres- 
ence of  milk  can  be  detected  and  a  considerable  enlargement  of  the  stomach 
takes  place.  Her  behavior,  too,  clearly  indicates  that  she  is  uneasy  and  in 
pain,  and  in  many  instances  the  appetite  entirely  fails,  and  the  bowels 
become  confined.  In  the  latter  case  a  mild  purgative  of  either  castor, 
linseed  or  sweet  oil  must  be  given.  The  first-named  remedy  is  sometimes 
too  powerful  an  aperient  for  a  bitch  in  such  a  condition,  as,  in  the  more 
delicate  breeds  especially,  it  is  apt  to  cause  severe  straining,  which  would 
injure  the  puppies.  Before  resorting,  therefore,  to  castor  oil,  an  experimen- 
tal dose  of  either  linseed  or  sweet  oil  might  be  administered,  which,  if  it 
succeeds  in  acting  on  the  bowels,  will  have  satisfactorily  accomplished  the 
owner's  object;  and  as  the  lubricating  power  of  all  three  oils  is  essentially 
the  same,  the  internal  organs  will  be  equally  benefited  by  either  medi- 
cine." 

It  is  a  good  plan  to  treat  the  brood  bitch  thoroughly  for  worms  be- 
fore being  put  to  the  dog;  and  stud  dogs  should  be  periodically  treated  for 
these  pests. 


280  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 




MY  ADVERTISERS 


Selected  from  the  leading  kennels  only — and 
quite  important  to  dog-interested  people  to 
know  where  a  dog  of  the  right  sort  can  be 
bought  at  a  right  price — from  the  right 
people.  Every  one  of  them  will  treat  you  square.  Most  of  them 
I  know  personally,  and  in  ordering,  you  can,  with  perfect 
safety,  send  the  money  with  the  order  (not  necessary  to  have 
the  dog  sent  on  approval),  for  they  will  ship  you  a  dog  ex- 
actly as  represented — that  will  please  and  satisfy  you. 

Read  the  Advertisements! 

THEY  ARE  ALSO  VALUABLE. 

With  a  feeling  of  pride,  I  now  introduce  to  your  notice  the 
most  select  lot  of  advertisements  that  have  ever  appeared  in 

a  Dog  Book.  AL.  G.  EBERHART 

PLEASE  MENTION  THIS  BOOK  WHEN  WRITING. 

CANINE  BOARDING  HOUSE 

DOGS    TAKEN     TO     BOARD 

TERMS — $7  to  $10  per  month,  according  to  size — 

PAYABLE  IN  ADVANCE. 

NO  DOGS  TAKEN  SUFFERING  WITH  DISTEMPER  OR 

MANGE. 
CAN  TAKE  ECZEMA  CASES  TO  TREAT  AT  FIFTY  CENTS 

PER    DAY — MEDICINES    CHARGED    EXTRA. 
OUR   Kennels   are    beautifully    located    on    the    Little    Miami 
River,   at  Camp   Dennison,   Ohio,   sixteen  miles  out  of 
Cincinnati,  forty  minutes'  ride  on  the  Penna.  R.  R. 

We  have  large  grounds,  seventeen  individual  yards,  en- 
closed by  high  and  secure  fences.  Sleeping  kennel  in  each  of 
these  yards,  the  yards  opening  to  a  large  paddock,  where  all 
dogs  are  given  exercise  three  times  a  day.  Plenty  of  shade 
and  grass,  and  everything  conducive  to  health,  happiness  and 
safety  of  dogs. 

While  same  care  is  given  each  dog  as  if  it  were  our  own, 
yet  we  assume  no  responsibility  as  to  accidents.  Dogs  are  at 
owner's  risk. 

VISITORS  ALWAYS  WELCOME,  BUT  PREFER  VISITS  BY 
APPOINTMENT. 

THE  EBERHART  KENNELS,  camp  dennison,  ohio. 

CINCINNATI  OFFICE.  23  EAST  SIXTH  STREET. 


282  USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS. 

spoonful.  These  quantities  may  be  given  5  or  6  times  a  day  in  addition 
to  the  mother's  milk,  and  may  be  slowly  increased  as  necessary. 

For  breeds  in  which  small  size  is  essential,  as,  for  instance,  in  terriers 
and  toys,  concentrated  puppy  foods  must  be  used  with  caution  and  not 
continued  longer  than  is  necessary,  lest  they  make  the  dogs  grow  too  big. 
Improved  nourishment  necessarily  implies  increased  bodily  development; 
and  one  of  the  most  successful  and  observant  breeders  of  Scottish  terriers 
recently  told  the  writer  that  he  has  had  to  altogether  abandon  the  use 
of  such  foods  because  they  made  his  dogs  grow  too  big. 

Little  puppies  fed  upon  plain  cow's  milk  have  either  to  go  short  of 
proper  nourishment  or  to  overtax  their  stomachs  by  loading  them  with 
about  thrice  the  bulk  of  food  for  which  they  have  natural  capacity.  Viewed 
from  this  standpoint,  the  plight  of  poor  little  wretches  fed  on  diluted 
cow's  milk  is  evil  indeed.  We  have  all  of  us  seen  puppies  grudgingly  al- 
lowed just  enough  nourishment  to  live  upon  until  they  are  able  to  take 
care  of  themselves — poor,  sunken-eyed,  half-starved  little  creatures  that 
do  somehow  manage  to  pull  through  on  bread  and  watered  milk,  on  which 
they  gorge  themselves  when  they  get  a  chance  until  it  is  a  marvel  they  do 
not  burst  and  thus  end  their  miserable  existence.  No  wonder  that  such 
of  them  as  struggle  through  to  maturity  make  small,  pot-bellied  dogs.  It 
is  the  worst  possible  policy  to  breed  good  puppies  and  then  starve  them. 


SEPERATING  DOGS  WHEN  FIGHTING 


One  dog  supposed  to  have  a  hold  on  the  other  dog,  generally  the  case, 
so  I  give  this  as  a  sample.  A  pail  of  water  will  in  many  cases  make  the 
dog  let  go — for  a  minute  or  less,  but  in  some  breeds,  as  Bull  terriers,  or 
Airedale  terriers,  this  will  not  work.  You  might,  if  strong  enough  in  the 
hand,  choke  the  one  dog  off,  but  in  cases  of  Bull  terriers  I  have  failed, 
if  you  had  a  bottle  of  amonia  right  there,  this  would  make  any  dog  let  go — 
for  a  minute  or  so  only,  if  it  was  a  Bull  terrier.  What  will  make  any  dog 
let  go  is  a  lit  cigar  held  to  his  nose,  or,  a  burning  match  may  do  if  no  lit 
cigar  is  handy.  The  trouble  now  comes  up,  after  separated,  that  one  or 
both  dogs  will  get  right  at  it  again,  and  here  is  where  you  must  have  a 
level  head,  and  your  nerve,  to  prevent  this.  One  person  alone  will  have  a 
contract  on  his  hands,  but  if  there  happens  to  be  some  other  sensible 
man  there  to  assist,  each  one  of  you  grab  a  dog  by  his  collar,  or,  if  no 
collar  on  dog,  then  by  the  nap  of  his  neck,  and  hold  your  dog  back.  I  have 
separated  dogs  alone,  by  holding  each  one  apart  at  arms  length,  but  it's 
quite  a  job.  A  dog  can't  bite  you,  if  you  keep  your  head,  not  afraid  or 
scared  yourself,  when  you  have  a  firm  hold  on  his  collar,  on  top  of  his  neck, 
or  by  the  nap  of  his  neck,  on  top.  Neither  dog  in  the  fight  is  wanting  to 
bite  you — it's  the  other  dog  he  is  after. 

Now  see  In  this  book,  "Bites,"  as  to  how  to  treat  them  if  dog  is 
bitten,  or  you  might  be. 


DISFECTANTS 


A  disinfectant  is  important  to  health  and  absolutely  necessary  in  ev- 
ery kennel.     All  bench  shows  use  some  disinfectant  of  which  there  are 


USEFUL  INFORMATION  REGARDING  DOGS.  283 

several  good  ones.  Carbolic  Acid  has  been  used  by  many,  but  great  care 
must  be  taken  to  use  it,  properly  diluted  and  not  too  strong,  or  harm  will 
come  from  it.  Chloride  of  Lime  is  also  used,  but  to  some  people  it  is  very 
offensive  because  of  its  odor,  and  if  used  should  be  properly  mixed. 

A  much  safer  and  better  plan  is  to  use  one  that  is  especially  and  pro- 
perly compounded  for  the  purpose,  by  experts — then  you  are  safe. 

Standard  Disinfectant,  made  by  The  Standard  Disinfectant  Co.,  of 
Perry,  Ohio,  (see  their  advertisement),  is  one  that  I  have  used  for  years, 
exclusively,  and  it  is,  in  my  opinion,  as  good  as  any — and  my  choice,  having 
tried  several  others,  that  are  also  good.  I  prefer  to  use  it  in  its  crude 
form,  properly  diluted  with  water.  For  particulars  see  their  advertisement 
in  this  book.  Standard  Disinfectant  is  a  good  thing,  safe,  reliable  and  a 
perfect  disinfectant.  You  will  be  satisfied  and  pleased  from  the  results 
of  using  it.  It  is  very  reasonable  in  price,  this  quite  an  important  item  as 
well.    In  having  my  kennels  scrubbed,  I  use  it  pretty  strong  in  the  hot  water. 

