


182  i  HYDROPHOBIA 


HYDROPHOBIA 


The  followng  article,  (with  some  additions),  is  the  one  in  my  last  book, 
and  it  cannot  well  be  improved  on,  but  have  added  some  strong  words 
against  Hydrophobia,  the  side- 1  fight  on,  as,  since  this  was  written,  fifteen 
years  ago,  my  non-believe  in  hydrophobia  has  been  made  stronger,  as  during 
this  period  I  have  been  bitten  several  times,  and  quite  badly  chewed  up  by 
dogs  that — by  all  the  symptoms  that  are  supposed  to  exist,  and  yet  I  am 
here,   writing  another  book,   and   none  the  worse   for   the   bites. 

'  "Germs"  are  now  very  fashionable  with  doctors,  (before  we  had 
so  many  "germs"  there  were  not  nearly  so  many  sick  and  dying  people  as 
there  are  now),  but  now  most  all  verterinarians,  and  some  doctors,  get  out 
of  hydrophobia  the  easiest  way  they  can,  by  calling  it  a  "germ."  I  would 
like  to  see  one  of  these  "germs." 

Appendicitis,  now  so  fashionable  also,  in  humans,  and  an  operation 
almost  invariably  necessary,  (the  patient  often  dying,  but  "operation  very 
successful"),  and  it's  a  wonder  the  poor  dog  has  as  yet  not  gotten  this  trou- 
ble. 

To  speak  out  plain  and  honest,  I  do  not  believe  in  hydrophobia  at  all, 
for  I  don't  believe  what  I  don't  see,  and  a  good  deal  that  I  do  see.  Many 
others,  and  among  them  noted  authorities,  however,  do  believe  in  the  exis- 
tence of  such  a  disease,  and  in  writing  on  this  subject  I  shall  give  you  my 
own  ideas  and  belief,  and  also  those  of  others  more  noted  than  myself — 
so  you  can  read  it  all  and  believe  as  you  like. 

I  have  spent  a  lot  of  time  since  my  first  book  in  collecting  additional 
information  and  statistics  on  this  subject,  as  it  is  an  important  one  to  know 
all  about  that  you  can,  and  I  consider  that  in  this  article  all  has  been 
said  that  can  be  said.  The  authorities  I  quote,  pro.  and  con.,  are  eminent, 
and  the  case  is  now  presented  to  you,  the  jury,  to  decide: 

It  might  be  considered  presumptious  and  egotistical  in  me  to  say  that 
there  is  no  such  disease,  but  I  can  honestly  say  that  I  have  never  seen  a 
case,  and  don't  believe  in  it,  and  I  have  as  good  a  right  today  to  have  "gone 
mad"  as  any  one  who  was  ever  bitten  by  a  dog,  for  I  carry  scars  on  my 
body  that  have  been  there  for  many  years — from  bites  of  dogs — and  I 
have  been  bitten  hundreds  of  times  in  the  past  thirty  years.  While  I  am 
writing  this  article  I  have  five  sores  on  my  right  wrist  received  yesterday 
from  a  boarder,  a  mastiff,  but  I  fully  expect  to  be  able  to  finish  this  book 
and  live  for  many  years  yet,  long  enough  at  least  to  see  it  in  the  hands  of 
every  dog  owner  in  this  country;  in  fact,  I  never  had  time  to  "go  mad." 

In  handling  dogs  of  all  breeds,  strange  dogs,  curs  and  thoroughbreds, 
incidental  to  having  been  a  "dog  crank"  for  thirty-five  years,  it  necessarily 
follows  that  I  have  had  a  vast  and  varied  experience,  and  .could  not  have 
done  all  this  and  not  get  bitten.  The  bite  from  a  dog  does  not  trouble 
me  any  more  than  if  I  cut  my  finger,  which  might  be  inconvenient  and 
bothersome  for  a  few  days.  The  only  thing  I  have  ever  done  when  bitten, 
if  the  bite  was  on  a  part  of  the  body  where  I  could  get  my  lips  to  it, 
was  to  at  once  suck  the  blood  from  the  place  bitten  and  spit  it  out.  This 
ends  the  matter  there  and  then  with  me.  There  might  have  been  danger 
of  blood  poisoning,  as  there  always  is  from  a  wound,  but  if  so,  how  simple 
to  suck  out  this  poison  and  at  once  get  rid  of  all  danger  by  spitting  out 
the  poison  you  have  abstracted  from  the  wound.  It  must  be  done  imme- 
diately, however.     Is  there  anything  more  simple  than  this? 

In  case  you  are  bitten  on  any  portion  of  the  body  that  you  could  not 
get  at  to  suck  the  wound,  or  some  one  was  not  near  to  do  this  for  you, 


Hydrophobia  m 

then  apply  Peroxyde  of  Hydrogen  to  the  bite.  Allow  it  to  remain  on  for 
a  minute  or  so,  then  remove  the  foamy  matter  produced  thereby  by  squeez- 
ing onto  it  some  water  from  a  sponge  or  cloth.  Then  keep  the  wound 
clean  by  applying  the  Peroxyde  three  or  four  times  a  day  and  using  often 
the   antiseptic   solution   given   under   heading   of   "Bites." 

(Since  writing  this  article,  tincture  of  iron  is  the  latest  treatment, 
now  used  by  doctors  for  bites,  instead  of  cauterizing  the  wounds,  and  then, 
the  "Unguentine  Salve"  for  healing). 

Now,  should  you  be  bitten  by  a  dog,  if  you  are  a  sensible  person,  not 
nervous  or  easily  scared,  have  not  read  too  many  highly  colored  and  sensa- 
tional "mad  dog"  items  in  the  newspapers  (which  kill  more  people  than 
dogs  do),  and  keep  your  sober  senses  about  you,  don't  believe  or  pay  any 
attention  to  what  your  supposed  friends  say,  when  they  tell  you  "how 
sorry  they  are,"  and  bestow  on  you  a  look  of  pity,  but  go  about  your  busi- 
ness as  usual;  forget  the  affair,  and  you  will  never  go  mad.  If  you  believe 
all  you  read  and  hear  as  to  going  mad,  lose  your  nerve  and  senses  and  get 
scared,  it's  the  easiest  thing  in  the  world  to  "go  mad"  and  die. 

If  this  is  not  logic,  why  have  I  not  gone  mad  years  ago?  I  was  bitten 
a  couple  of  years  ago  by  a  Yorkshire  terrier  brought  to  me  that  was  suf- 
fering from  what  a  very  good  veterinary  surgeon  in  Cincinnati  had  diagnos- 
ed as  dumb  rabies  in  this  dog.  I  could  not  take  the  dog  to  treat,  as  I 
was  just  starting  .on  a  trip,  so  sent  the  animal  to  a  veterinary  surgen,  who 
took  him  to  treat.  This  dog,  after  biting  me,  also  bit  him,  and  the  dog 
died  in  twenty-four  hours.  The  doctor  held  a  post-mortem  examination  and 
told  me  it  was  a  case  of  dumb  rabies;  but  the  doctor  and  I  are  both  living. 

Find  me  a  doctor  who  can  cure  hydrophobia,  and  then  I  will  be  glad 
to  have  him  explain  to  me  what  the  disease  is.  If  he  can  do  this,  then  I'll 
try  to  believe  there  is  such  a  thing  as  hydrophobia.  If  he  can't  cure  it,  he 
doesn't  know  what  it  is,  for  there  is  in  this  enlightened  age  a  cure  for  every 
disease;  but  you  must  first  know  what  ycu  are  trying  to  cure,  or  you  won't 
cure  it. 

Every  summer  the  papers  are  full  of  mad  dog  victims;  but  our  best 
authorities  who  do  believe  in  hydrophobia  will  tell  you  that  summer,  or 
in  hot  weather,  is  not  the  season  of  the  year  that  dogs  go  mad.  You  read 
of  the  person  dying  in  great  agony;  that  he  bites  and  barks,  etc.,  etc.  So 
he  apparently  does,  I  will  admit,  as  I  know  of  some  authenticated  cases  like 
this,  but  the  "barking  and  biting"  could  easily  be  explained  if  the  atten- 
dants and  friends  who  saw  it  were  not  all  themselves  scared  and  off  their 
base  and  had  let  imagination  make  them  so — all  due  to  the  scare  that  comes 
to  so  many  from  the  awful  word  "hydrophobia"  and  the  many  vivid  and 
overdrawn  accounts  they  have  read  in  the  papers  gotten  up  by  a  very  bright 
reporter  who  had  to  furnish  something  sensational  for  his  paper.  It's  just 
like  the  cry  of  "fire"  to  so  many  people,  who  often  lose  their  lives  by  not 
retaining  their  senses  about  them  and  in  most  cases  of  this  kind  taking 
their  time  and  getting  safely  out  of  the  burning  building,  instead  of  either 
jumping  out  of  a  high  window  to  be  dashed  to  pieces  on  the  pavement  below 
or  getting  .crushed  to  death  in  the  mad  rush  of  the  others. 

In  case  you  are  bitten  by  a  dog,  see  to  it  that  the  dog  is  not  killed, 
but  that  he  is  confined  and  well  taken  care  of  for  a  few  weeks,  at  least 
until  you  can  see  and  know  for  yourself  that  he  was  not  mad,  and  then 
you  can  drop  the  matter.  What  an  insane  idea  it  is  to  kill  the  dog  after  he 
has  bitten  you,  for  then  you  will  never  know  whether  he  was  mad  or  not, 
and  the  constant  dread  and  fear  will  always  be  with  you,  and  probably — 
if  you  are  of  a  nervous  disposition — may  yet  cause  you  to  "go  mad"  and 
die.  I  have  often  been  called  in  to  put  a  poor  dog  out  of  the  way  that  was 
supposed  to  be  mad  (and  I  chloroformed  it  according  to  orders  from  its 
owner),  thinking  to  myself  at  the  time  that  it  was  better  for  the  dog  than 
to  live  and  be  cared  for  by  an  idiot  who  did  not  know  near  as  much  as 
the  poor  dog,  who  was  in  serious  trouble,  of  course,  but  due  to  some  natural 
cause  and  not  to  so-called  hydrophobia.  Sometimes,  however,  out  of  pity 
for  the  dog,  when  I  saw  he  had  a  chance  to  live  if  properly  treated,  I  have 
asked  to  be  allowed  to  take  the  dog  to  my  kennels,  and  I  went  to  work 


184  HYDROPHOBIA 

and  saved  the  pooi*  fellow.  I  am  deeply  in  earnest  in  my  views  oil  this" 
much-mooted  suhject,  and  I  believe  that  thousands  of  people  would  be  alive 
today  that  have  died  from  hydrophobia  if  they  would  look  at  the  matter 
os  I  do  and  act  accordingly.  Many  poor  dogs  have  fits  hi  summer,  due  to 
many  causes,  but  they  could  nearly  all  have  been  cured  ii  properly  treated 
in  time,  and  as  all  important  diseases  are  treated  in  this  book,  if  you  will 
follow  its  teachings  your  dog  will  live  until  the  time  comes  for  him  to  pass 
in  his  checks  and  go  to  "dog  heaven"  with  the  rest  of  the  good  canines 
gone  before. 

A  hard  question  for  you  or  any  doctor  to  answer  is,  "Why  have  I 
not  gone  mad"  when  it  is  a  fact  not  to  be  denied  that  I  have  been  bitten 
bitten  by  so-called  mad  dogs?  I  am  willing  to  be  convinced  that  I  am  wrong, 
if  it  can  be  done.  While  I  may  be  taking  up  too  much  space  on  this  subject, 
yet  it  is  an  important  one.  I  will  next  give  two  interviews  that  were  pub- 
lished in  March,  1896,  in  a  St.  Louis  paper  that  may  interest  and  benefit 
some: 

"Prof.  Al.  G.  Eberhart,  who  came  to  St.  Louis  last  v/eek  to  assume 
active  charge  of  the  preparations  for  the  bench  show,  is  a  man  who  has  spent 
the  better  part  of  his  life  raising  and  caring  for  dogs,  and  his  opinion  upon 
this  subject  is  that  of  an  authority.      Prof.  Eberhart  says: 

"  '1  nave  been  bitten  by  dogs  over  a  hundred  times  in  my  life  and  carry 
scars  now  that  I've  had  for  twenty-five  years.  Some  of  these  so-called  mad 
dogs  have  bitten  me,  but  yet  I  am  not  mad.  I  have  been  bitten  by  dogs 
that  veterinary  surgeons  and  regular  physicians  have  pronounced  and  diag- 
nosed as  having  rabies,  but  I  didn't  go  mad  because  I've  yet  to  see  a  genuine 
mad  dog.  Had  I  been  nervous  and  easily  scared  I  would  very  likely  have 
been  buried  long  ago.  Some  ten  years  ago  a  young  lady  in  New  York  City 
was  bitten  by  her  pet  dog,  and,  not  wanting  to  have  it  killed,  it  was  sent 
to  Harry  Jennings,  the  dog  fancier.  The  dog  bit  him  several  times.  The 
young  lady  died  in  three  weeks  from  alleged  hydrophobia,  and  Harry 
Jennings  is  alive  yet.  The  young  lady  died  from  fright.  This  I  know  to 
be  a  fact.  Find  me  a  doctor  that  can  tell  what  hydrophobia  is,  then  I'll 
try  to  believe  there  is  such  a  disease.  If  the  doctor  can't  tell  you  what 
the  disease  is,  he  surely  can't  cure  it.  When  a  dog  bites  you,  if  it  is  on 
any  part  of  your  body  where  you  can  get  your  mouth  to  it  as  soon  as  bitten, 
suck  the  wound,  thus  quickly  abstracting  the  poison  if  any  there,  spit  it  out 
and  forget  that  you  were  bitten  by  a  dog,  for  depend  on  it  this  ends  the 
matter  there  and  then.  You  have  gotten  rid  of  the  poison  before  it  was 
distributed  through  the  system.  If  on  any  part  of  the  body  you  can't  get 
at,  get  a  friend  to  do  it  for  you.  Another  method  that  is  good  is  to  at  once 
wash  the  wound  with  water.  Then  apply  the  actual  cautery,  a  piece  of  iron 
heated  to  white  heat,  not  to  the  flesh,  but  hold  it  about  half  an  inch  from 
it.  The  intense  heat  causes  but  little  pain  and  will  destroy  the  bacilli  of 
rabies  to  the  depth  of  one-quarter  of  an  inch.  If  carbolic  or  nitric  acid  or 
nitrate  of  silver  is  used,  not  five  minutes  should  elapse,  as  unless  properly 
performed  inside  of  ten  minutes  it  is  not  only  useless  but  positively  injur- 
ious as  the  poison  of  rabies  will  have  been  distributed  throughout  the  sys- 
tem in  this  time.'  " 

The  following  appeared  editorially  in  the  St.  Louis  Republic  of  Febru- 
ary 24,  1896:  "The  interview  with  Prof.  Al.  G.  Eberhart,  Superintendent  of 
the  St.  Louis  bench  show,  which  was  printed  in  the  Sunday  Post-Dispatch, 
in  which  Prof.  Eberhart  made  the  assertion  that  he  had  never  seen  a 
genuine  case  of  hydrophobia,  and  that  he  believed  that  cases  that  resulted 
in  what  was  diagnosed  as  rabies  from  the  effects  of  dog  bites  were  the 
result  of  imagination,  has  created  much  talk  and  considerable  comment. 

"Prof.  Eberhart  was  called  upon  Saturday  by  a  Post-Dispatch  re- 
porter, and  asked  if  he  could  make  his  position  as  a  disbeliever  in  the  ex- 
istence of  the  disease  plainer  than  those  reasons  given  in  the  short  letter 
in  last   Sunday's   Post-Dispatch. 

"  'Yes,'  said  the  Professor,  'I  believe  that  I  can.  When  I  said  that 
I  had  never  seen  a  genuine  case  of  hydrophobia  I  meant  it.  I  have  seen 
many  dogs  that  were  thought  to  be  mad,  but  have  never  yet  seen  one  that 


HYDROi'llOlSiA  185 

1  Was  thoroughly  Satisfied  was  afflicted  with  rabies.  If  people  would  save 
the  lives  of  dogs  suspected  of  being  thus  affected,  we  might  in  time  have 
an  understanding  of  the  subject  by  studying  the  sick  dogs.  But  the  first 
thing  that  happens  to  a  dog  when  he  shows  signs  of  anything  wrong  is  to 
immediately  suspect  it  of  being  mad,  and  after  that  it  is  a  very  short  time 
until  its  existence  is  ended  by  a  bullet  through  the  head,  and  the  most  val- 
uable evidence  in  the  case  is  destroyed.  If  the  dog  had  been  spared  and 
confined,  if  he  had  been  mad,  the  fact  could  have  been  easily  determined, 
and  he  could  be  destroyed  after  the  evidence  was  complete  that  it  was  a 
case  of  rabies  without  a  shadow  of  doubt.  But  this  course  is  seldom  pursued, 
and  the  dog  that  has  bitten  any  one  in  a  spasm.it  makes  no  matter  what 
was  the  foundation  for  his  pain,  is  immediately  killed  without  regard  to  his 
value,  and  the  bitten  party  left  to  suffer  the  torments  of  uncertainty  as  to 
whether  he  or  she  was  inoculated  with  the  virus  of  hydrophobia  or  not. 

"  'Now  here  is  a  case  in  point,'  continued  the  professor.  'Last  week, 
just  before  I  came  to  St.  Louis,  a  gentleman  called  on  me  one  evening  at 
my  home  in  Cincinnati  and  said  that  he  had  just  taken  his  pet  dog  to  the 
police  station  near  my  house  to  be  shot;  that  he  thought  that  the  dog  had 
gone  mad,  and  to  be  on  the  safe  side  he  had  decided  to  have  him  destroyed, 
and  had  brought  him  to  the  station  house  for  that  purpose.  It  was  with 
much  reluctance  that  he  did  this,  however,  as  the  dog  was  a  household  pet, 
and  its  death  would  be  keenly  felt  and  its  presence  missed.  The  policeman 
who  was  on  duty  at  the  time  suggested  that,  as  I  lived  near  the  station  he 
could  call  me  over  to  look  at  the  dog.  I  assured  the  gentleman  that  I 
would  go  over  to  the  station  in  a  few  minutes,  and  if  I  could  do  anything 
for  the  animal  I  would  use  the  extent  of  my  abilities,  and  he  returned  home. 
"  'After  I  had  finished  my  dinner  I  went  over  to  the  police  station  and 
found  that  the  Sergeant  had  arrived.  I  asked  him  if  he  had  the  dog. 
"  'Yes,  said  he;  'he's  in  that  cage  there." 
"  'Bring  him  out,'  said   I. 

"  'Not  on  your  life,'  replied  the  Sergeant.  'I  wouldn't  touch  that  dog 
for  all  the  money  in  Hamilton  County.  Why,  man,  he's  mad;  I  won't  go 
near  him.  If  you  want  to  be  foolish  enough  to  try  and  do  anything  with 
him,  go  and  unlock  the  cell  yourself;  I  think  he  ought  to  be  shot  without 
delay.' 

"  'Well,  I  went  over  to  the  cell  and  saw  the  dog.  He  was  a  little 
Italian  greyhound,  as  fragile-looking  as  a  long-stemmed  wine  glass.  The 
poor  little  fellow  was  in  the  throes  of  a  hard  spasm  as  I  looked  at  him. 
He  had  his  delicate,  slender,  head  thrust  between  the  bars  in  his  pain,  and 
his  hind-quarters  were  jammed  in  between  the  two  adjoining  uprights.  He 
looked  up  at  me  with  fear  showing  out  of  his  sick,  brown  eyes,  but  be- 
trayed no  signs  of  dog  madness.  He  was  so  weak  and  trembling  that  he 
could  scarcely  stand. 

"  'I  unlocked  the  cell  door  and  went  in  and  picked  the  little  fellow 
up,  and  after  soothing  him  and  getting  him  quieted  down  a  little,  I  admin- 
istered a  dose  of  a  fractional  part  of  a  grain  of  morphine  to  ease  his  im- 
mediate pain,  and  carried  him  away.  A  little  later  I  gave  him  a  small  dose 
of  castor  oil  and  put  him  to  bed.  I  sat  up  with  that  dog  until  3  o'clock 
in  the  morning,  and  after  he  was  relieved  by  the  oil  he  was  well,  and, 
barring  the  weakness  resulting  from  his  terrific  spasms  of  the  night  before, 
he  was  perfectly  sound.'  " 

(I  forgot  to  state  in  this  interview  that  before  leaving  the  dog,  and 
after  the  oil,  I  gave  him  a  dose  of  worm  medicine;  result  was  a  lot  of 
worms  passed,  and  here  was  the  cause  of  this  "mad  dog.") 

"  'After  I  had  arisen  in  the  morning  I  telephoned  the  owner  of  the 
dog  to  come  and  get  his  pet,  He  came,  and  his  gratitude  was  manifest 
in  the  way  he  greeted  the  little  fellow  that  he  had  condemned  to  death  the 
night  before, 

"  'Now,  supposing  that  the  dog  had  bitten  the  Police  Sergeant.  The 
Sergeant  was  firmly  convinced  that  the  dog  was  afflicted  with  the  rabies, 
and  if,  by  any  possibility  the  dog  had  bitten  him  he  would  have  worried 
himself  until  it  would  have  perhaps  resulted  in  an  attack  of  hydrophobia, 


186  Hydrophobia 

The  clog  would  have  been  immediately  killed,  and  thus  all  evidence  that 
there  was  no  rabies  manifested  in  the  animal  would  have  been  destroyed, 
and  another  name  would  have  been  added  to  the  list  of  supposed  victims  to 
this  terrible  disease,  delusion,  or  whatever  you  choose  to  term  it. 

"  'But  what  was  really  the  matter  with  the  dog,  Professor?'  queried 
the  Post-Dispatch  man. 

"  'Worms,'  said  Prof.  Eberhart,  'nothing  but  worms.  And  let  me  tell 
you  that  at  the  bottom  of  nearly  every  illness  to  which  a  dog  is  subjected 
you  will  find  worms  to  be  the  cause.  In  fact,  they  cause  eight-tenths  of  all 
the  deaths  in  the  canine  world.  If  owners  would  keep  their  dogs'  bowels 
open  with  an  occasional  dose  of  some  purgative  there  would  be  many  less 
cases  of  "mad  dogs"  like  that  poor  little,  shivering,  sick  Italian  greyhound 
lying   on   the   sold   stone  floor   of  that   Cincinnati   station   cell. 

"  'But  that  wasn't  the  end  of  that  case,'  continued  the  Professor,  'and 
this  part  of  it  shows  just  how  little  this  question  of  mad  dogs  is  undersood. 
After  I  had  gone  down  town  to  my  office  the  same  morning  the  dog  had 
been  taken  home,  his  owner,  who  had  called  for  him  in  the  morning, 
came  in. 

"  'Now,  Professor,'  said  he,  'I  know  and  you  know  that  our  dog  is 
all  right,  but  my  wife  has  been  worrying  all  night  about  him,  and  she 
was  so  frightened  yesterday  over  his  wild  running  and  jumping  that  noth- 
ing but  a  personal  visit  from  you  will  reassure  her  and  quiet  her  fears, 
and  I  wish  you  would  call  at  my  house  and  see  her. 

"  'I  went  out  to  the  gentleman's  residence  and  talked  to  his  wife.  I 
told  her  how  her  dog  would  act  under  certain  conditions.  I  asked  her,  if 
her  infant  was  thrown  into  spasms  from  worms  if  she  would  be  afraid  of 
contracting  hydrophobia  from  it.  I  showed  her  that  an  ailment  affected 
a  dog  exactly  as  it  would  a  human.  She  was  a  sensible  woman  and  saw 
the  point  at  once,  and  I  am  sure  there  will  be  no  more  "rabies"  in  her  dogs. 

"  'Now,  I  know  of  another  case,'  said  the  professor,  'where  a  small 
child  was  bitten  and  a  fearful  gash  cut  by  the  dog's  teeth  clean  to  the 
skull,  and  that  dog  died  two  days  later  with  all  the  aversion  to  water  that 
they  claim  is  an  infallible  symptom  of  hydrophobia,  that  he  could  manifest 
still  the  little  boy  did  not  have  rabies,  and  simply  because  he  was  too  small 
to  take  part  in  his  parents'  worry  over  the  outcome  of  the  bite.'  " 

The  following  appeared  editorially  in  the  St.  Louis  Republic,  Feb.  24, 
1896: 

"Is  the  Mad  Dog  a  Myth? 

"This  is  far  from  dog-day  time,  but  The  Republic  trusts  that  the  optim- 
ism of  the  St.  Louis  Bench  Show's  Superintendent  will  be  treasured  by  ner- 
vous mothers  for  use  next  August.  He  says  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as 
poisonous  rabies  in  dogs. 

"It  is  curious  that  every  man  who  has  handled  great  numbers  of  dogs 
bears  the  same  testimony. 

"There  is  danger  of  blood  poisoning  as  a  result  of  any  animal's  bite; 
and  there  is  lock-jaw  as  the  extreme  effect  of  blood  poisoning.  But  the  men 
who  have  been  longest  in  charge  of  dogs  agree  that  there  is  no  rabid  con- 
dition when  a  bite  is  more  dangerous  than  at  any  other  time;  and  that  a 
dog's  bite  at  any  time  is  no  more  dangerous  than  the  scratch  of  a  cat. 

"It  does  seem  that  they  ought  to  know.  For  the  sake  of  humanity's 
peace  of  mind  the  doctors  should  find  out  whether  the  experience  of  men 
who  have  been  bitten  dozens  of  times  is  worth  anything." 

Harry  W.  Lacy  recently  wrote  in  the  American  Stockkeeper  on  this 
subject:  "One  would  think  that  a  man  having  intelligence  enough  to  write 
editorials  on  a  leading  daily  paper  would  inform  himself  sufficiently  on  the 
subject  not  to  make  such  a  foolish  statement  as  that  muzzling  dogs  was  a 
sure  way  to  produce  hydrophobia,  but  this  is  what  a  Boston  Standard 
editorial  said  last  week.  Probably  there  is  no  subject  about  which  the 
average  newspaper  writer  gets  off  more  tommy  rot  than  hydrophobia  and 
mad  dog  scares. 


Hydrophobia  s  is? 

"These  hydrophobia  scares  are  mainly  due  to  the  sensational  imagina- 
tion of  the  reporter  who  plays  upon  the  nervousness  of  a  public  only  too 
ready  to  shy  a  stone  at  dog,  and  then  when  the  scare  has  assumed  suitable 
proportions  and  a  muzzling  order  goes  forth,  these  writers  are  again  the 
first  to  question  its  advisability  and  play  on  tbe  feeling  of  their  readers 
who  may  own  dogs,  with  the  nonsensical  statement  alluded  to  above. 

"The  very  rare  disease  called  hydrophobia  can  only  be  produced 
through- inoculation  with  the  rabial  virus,  and  a  dog  might  mear  a  muzzle 
to  the  end  of  his  natural  life,  and  unless  he  was  actually  bitten  by  a  rabid 
dog  he  would  be  none  the  worse,  though,  according  to  his  temperament, 
the  incubus  might  make  him  bad  tempered,  irritable,  and  so  excite  his  ner- 
vous temperament  as  to  send  him  into  a  fit  wherein  he  would  probably  dis- 
play some  of  those  symptoms  of  rabies  popularly,  but  erroneously,  asso- 
ciated with  hydrophobia. 

"If  such  a  thing  as  hydrophobia  really  exists  in  a  locality  there  is  no 
surer  method  to  stamp  it  out  than  a  general  muzzling  order  strictly  en- 
forced. The  reason  is  obvious.  This  may  entail  hardship  on  individual 
dogs,  but  the  good  of  the  others  and  the  community  at  large  demands  it. 

"Speaking  of  hydrophobia  scares  we  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  the 
Pasteur  Institute  in  New  York  has  done  more  to  keep  alive  an  unhealthy 
state  of  public  mind  in  regard  to  the  disease  than  any  other  agency.  The 
advent  of  new  patients  is  heralded  throughout  the  country,  and  patients 
from  distant  states  are  treated  on  the  supposition  that  they  have  been  bit- 
ten by  mad  dogs,  but  rarely  is  it  proved  that  the  dogs  were  really  rabid. 
Still  they  undergo  the  treatment,  and  Dr.  Gibier  claims  credit  for  subse- 
quent immunity." 

Here  are  the  ideas  of  Dr.  H.  Clay  Glover,  of  New  York  City,  one  of  the 
highest  authorities  on  canine  diseases  that  we  have  in  America: 

Dr.  H.  Clay  Glover,  interviewed  on  the  muzzling  question  by  a  New 
York  Herald  man,  was  asked  why  the  muzzle  was  unnecessary.  "Because," 
said  Dr.  Glover,  "it  is  of  no  possible  benefit  either  to  the  dog  or  public.  The 
mad  dog  scare,  which  has  been  so  long  agitated,  is  a  myth,  and  one  calcu- 
lated to  do  much  injury  by  the  introduction  of  false  hydrophobia  induced 
by  fear.  During  my  long  experience  in  canine  practice  I  have  never  seen 
but  one  case  of  authenticated  rabies.  I  have  been  called  to  see  hundreds 
of  so-called  mad  dogs,  and  found  they  were  merely  in  convulsions,  afflicted 
by  epilepsy  or  suffering  from  an  attack  of  indigestion  or  from  over  excite- 
ment, all  of  which  yield  to  proper  treatment." 

Another  very  able  authority  is  next  given: 

In  the  Animal  World,  Mr.  Rotherhan,  a  canine  practitioner,  describes 
the  differences  between  rabies,  apoplexy  and  epilepsy.  He  says:  "In  rabies 
a  dog  never  foams  at  the  mouth,  its  tongue  and  lips  are  brown  and  hard- 
looking,  the  discharge  from  the  mouth  is  small  in  quantity,  brownish  in 
color  and  hangs  about  the  lips  like  strings  of  gum;  the  eyes  have  an  un- 
natural glare.  In  apoplexy  there  is  sudden  loss  of  power,  the  dog  falls 
down,  either  partially  or  wholly  insensible,  the  eyes  are  fixed  and  blood- 
shot, the  breathing  is  heavy;  there  is  no  unusual  discharge  of  saliva.  In 
epilepsy  the  dog  is  seen  to  tremble  just  as  the  fit  is  coming  on.  If  the  dog 
tries  to  move  he  falls  on  one  side,  his  jaws  begin  to  champ  violently,  all 
voluntary  muscles  are  powerfully  convulsed;  generally  he  utters  sharp,  short 
cries,  but  not  always;  there  is  a  copious  discharge  of  white,  frothy  saliva, 
the  gums  are  of  a  pale  leaden  hue.  When  recovering  from  an  epileptic  fit 
the  dog  has  a  bewildered  look,  the  eyes  having  a  dull  and  stupid  expression." 

So  great  is  the  popular  dread  of  hydrophobia  that  a  slight  derange- 
ment of  the  dog's  nervous  system  is  often  mistaken  for  symptoms  of  rabies, 
while  a  dog  in  convulsions,  in  an  epileptic  fit,  or  stricken  with  apoplexy 
may  be  shot  as  mad — particularly  if  it  be  hot  weather — before  there  is  a 
chance  of  determining  the  nature  of  his  disease.  The  principal  centers 
of  the  nervous  system  are  the  brain  and  the  spinal  cord.  These  Stonehenge 
compares  to  the  electric  telegraph.  The  brain  he  calls  the  central  office. 
From  that  station  are  issued  messages  to  all  parts  of  the  body,  and  the 
wires  which  carry  those  messages  are  the  nerves  of  motion,  the  nerves  of 


188  HYDROPHOBIA 

sensation  and  the  nerves  of  organic  life,  all  of  which  have  their  separate* 
ganglia,   or  the  lesser  station  masters. 

The  normal,  movements  of  the  body  are,  says  a  writer  in  Our  Animal 
Friends,  the  result  of  harmonious,  co-ordinated  functional  activity  of  the 
neuro-muscular  mechanism,  i.  e.,  of  the  nerve  centers,  nerves  and  muscles. 
In  convulsions  the  movements  are  purposeless  and  irregular,  and  are,  of 
course,  wasteful  of  the  animal  energies.  A  dog  may  have  a  fit  from  over- 
exertion in  the  heat  of  the  sun,  from  neuralgic  pains  or  from  toothache,  from 
meningitis,  excessive  fright,  parasites  in  the  nose  or  brain,  acute  ear  dis- 
ease, or  from  the  distress  of  being  lost  in  a  large  city;  or,,  if  a  female,  of 
being  deprived  of  her  whelps.  Recently  it  has  been  shown  that  mental 
distress  has  the  power  to  give  a  dog  diabetes.  It  stands  to  reason  that  so 
sensitive  an  animal  should  never  be  unduly  excited. 

On  no  account  allow  one  dog  to  see  another  in  a  fit.  The  suffering  dog 
should  have  his  head  wet  and  should  be  kept  for  a  time  in  a  dark,  quiet 
place,  free  from  all  excitement.  In  most  cases  of  convulsions  a  small  dose 
of  bromide  of  potassium  will  do  great  good.  Hydrophobia,  considered  as 
a  canine  disease  ,is  decidely  a  misnomer.  The  proper  term  for  canine 
madness  is  rabies.  The  rabid  dog  has  "no  fear  of  water."  On  the  con- 
trary, he  craves  it,  and,  unless  paralyzed,  he  has  no  difficulty  In  swallowing 
it.  Rabies  is  a  specific  disease  of  the  nervous  system.  In  all  cases  there 
is  an  intense  inflammation  of  the  brain  and  spinal  marrow,  ending  in  a 
loss  of  function,  which  is  a  result  common  to  inflamed  glands.  The  mucous 
glands  of  the  stomach  and  bowels,  the  liver,  the  pancreas  and  the  kidneys 
are  all  more  or  less  injected  with  blood;  but  the  salivary  glands  are 
especially  affected,  and  the  secretion  of  saliva  is  greatly  increased.  There 
is  the  furious  or  maniacal  form  of  rabies  and  the  paralytic.  The  paralytic 
is  known  as  dumb  rabies.  Absolutely  typical  cases  of  either  form  are  as 
rare  as  is  the  disease.  Death,  however,  usually  results  in  from  two  to  ten 
days  in  the  furious  form,  while  in  dumb  rabies  the  period  is  much 
shorter. 

The  howl  or  bark  of  a  mad  dog  is  very  remarkable.  It  is  totally  unlike 
his  ordinary  voice,  and  is  sonorous  and  melancholy  to  an  extreme.  No  one 
need  mistake  it.  The  dog's  appetite  is  so  perverted  that  he  will  swallow 
stones,  sticks,  straws  and  almost  any  filth.  His  biting  and  snapping  are 
reflex  actions;  that  should  not  be  regarded  as  deliberate.  It  is  then  that 
he  is  really  dangerous.  Irritability  is  an  advance  stage  of  rabies.  In  the 
earlier  stages  the  animal  is  sullen  and  inclined  to  hide  away  in  corners. 
His  eyes  grow  wild  and  suspicious.  If  at  large  he  will  roam  over  wide 
tracts  of  country  at  a  jog  trot,  with  his  head  down  and  his  tongue  out. 
In  dumb  rabies  there  is  an  entire  absence  of  excitement.  The  muscles  of 
mastication  are  paralyzed  so  that  the  lower  jaw  is  dropped!  there  is  no 
maniacal  stage  at  all. 

Epileptical  convulsions  are  due  to  an  irregular  discharge  of  the  nerve 
cells.  They  occur  unexpectedly,  are  of  variable  duration,  and  the  spasms 
are  of  two  kinds.  A  prolonged  muscular  contraction  is  called  a  tonic  spasm. 
Following  the  tonic  spasm  are  the  clonic  spasm,  which  consist  of  alternate 
contraction  and  relaxation.  The  dog,  like  the  human  subject,  will  froth 
at  the  mouth  and  bite  the  tongue.  Epilepsy  may  be  hereditary,  or  may 
be  due  to  teething  and  worms. 

Apoplexy  differs  greatly  from  epilepsy.  The  convulsions  are  not 
prominent;  the  pupils  of  the  eyes  are  either  contracted  or  dilated;  there 
is  long-continued  unconsciousness  and  more  or  less  paralysis. 

Meningitis,  so  often  mistaken  for  rabies,  is  yet  very  different.  The 
temperature  is  very  much  elevated,  which  it  is  not  in  rabies;  the  dog  snaps, 
but  shows  no  tendency  to  bite,  and  there  is  no  particular  bark  and  howl 
combined,  although  the  dog's  voice  is  high-pitched. 

Phrentitis  is  simply  inflammation  of  the  brain.  It  is  sometimes  a  com- 
plication of  distempers,  and  is  the  only  disorder  which  resembles  rabies. 
It  generally  occurs  in  the  hottest  weather.  The  dog  can  not  propagate 
phrentitis  by  salivary  inocculation. 

"Hydrophobia  in  human  beings,"  says  a  writer,  "results  from  accidents 


HYDROPHOBIA  189 

of  a  nervous  order,  sometimes  mortal,  sometimes  curable,  according  as 
they  derive  from  disorders  analogous  to  tentanus  (lockjaw)  produced  by 
a  wound  or  from  purely  mental  disorders."  According  to  Dr.  Caffe, 
"Spontaneous  rabiform  hydrophobia  is  the  only  rabies  that  exists,  and  that 
is  a  mortal  rabies."  Before  M.  Pasteur's  system  was  invented  about  nine- 
teen persons  annually  were  officially  reported  to  have  died  of  hydropho- 
bia. Now,  strange  as  it  may  seem,  the  number  of  persons  who  annually  re- 
port themselves  bitten  by  rabid  dogs  averages  from  1,500  to  2,000.  Rabies 
is  a  rare  disease,  rarer  today  than  in  the  past,  and  hydrophobia  is  more 
or  less  a  form  of  hysteria.  Were  there  less  talk  about  it,  it  would  be  bet- 
ter for  the  community.  A  little  more  knowledge  of  our  own  nervous  sys- 
tem, a  little  less  ignorance  of  the  dog's,  and  we  shall  be  far  more  likely 
to  escape  hydrophob  a  entirely  than  to  die  from  it  or  to  be  saved  by  inocu- 
lation. 

I  will  now  give  a  most  important  and  valuable  interview  with  the 
famous  medical  expert,  Prof.  Edward  C.  Spitzka,  of  New  York.  Prof. 
Spitzka  declares  the  Pasteur  rabies  theory  and  treatment  a  humbug  from 
start  to  finish,  and  rabies  to  be  a  hoax.  Ex-United  States  Surgeon  General 
Dr.  Wm.  A.  Hammond  indorses  his  decision.  Such  arguments  as  Prof. 
Spitzka's,  a  most  eminent  authority,  should  convince  every  one  who  reads 
it   that  he  is  correct: 

"Although  Pasteur  was  undoubtedly  as  sincere  in  his  work  as  his 
follower,  Paul  Gibier,  doubtless  is  in  dispensing  the  ridiculous  treatment," 
said  Prof.  Spitzka,  "I  am  willing  to  stake  my  reputation  that  there  is  no 
such  disease  as  'hydrophobia,'  or  'rabies,'  in  existence,  and  I  am  further 
impressed  that  the  Pasteur  inoculations  are  injurious.  This  is  not  merely 
my  opinion.  I  have  a  practical  explanation  for  every  statement  I  make, 
and  have  carefully  weighed  every  possible  opposition  to  my  conclusions 
for  a  parallel  consideration. 

"I  am  accordingly  prepared  to  answer  any  criticism.  Of  course,  the 
strongest  retaliation  I  shall  receive  will  be  the  broad  charge  that  I  am 
following  in  the  footsteps  of  the  narrow-minded  opposers  of.  the  Wonderful 
.Tenner  smallpox  vaccination  cPscovery,  on  which  the  Pasteur  treatment 
hinges  its  practicability.  As  to  this  most  enrnent  charge  there  is  no  con- 
nection between  the  two  treatments.  For  while  every  one  acknowledges 
the  existence  of  the  dreadful  smallpox,  the  existence  of  hydrophobia,  or  ra- 
bies, has  never  been  satisfactorily  demonstrated.  I  have  not  myself — nor  has 
any  other  expert  investigator — been  able  to  distinctly  diagnose  a  single 
case  of  the  so-called  malady,  to  my  knowledge.  I  have  often  witnessed 
the  symptoms,  commonly  termed  'rabies,'  but  in  every  instance  these  ex- 
citing observations  have  been  plainly  nothing  more  than  tetanus  symptoms 
of  acute  fevers  and   the  many  forms   of   deadly   blood   poisoning. 

"The  water  theory  is  too  absurd  and  ridiculous  to  have  any  significance. 
There  is  not  an  authority  to  be  found  for  its  assumption.  It  is  yet  to  be 
explained  how  water  could  possibly  have  such  an  effect,  while  all  the 
knowledge  modern  science  has  amassed  goes  to  provide  the  belief  merely  an 
antiquated  superstition,  to  which  some  people  still  cling. 

"When  Pasteur's  boom  was  exploded,  and  the  public  went  wild  with  en- 
thusiasm over  it,  along  with  the  great  majority  of  scientific  men,  I  was 
also  taken  in  by  the  contagion.  At  the  time  I  was  impressed  that  with 
the  increasing  knowledge  gained  in  the  field  of  contagious  and  epidemic 
diseases  generally,  much  substantial  advance  has  not  been  recorded  in 
the  history  of  the  mysterious  rabies,  but  realizing  that  this  was  not  due 
to  neglect  of  the  subject,  I  was  not  surprised  at  the  birth  of  the  Pasteur 
theory. 

"Owing  to  the  terrible  nature  of  the  symptoms  attributed  to  this 
unfounded  malady,  an  attractive  field  of  research  has  been  open  to  those 
animated  by  an  earnest  desire  to  prevent  and  relieve  human  sufferings 
from  the  time  of  the  earliest  civilization.  The  symptoms  are  described  in 
the  works  of  Horace,  Aristotle,  Virgil  and  Plutarch,  in  a  manner  which 
Allows   that    while   the    world    has   advanced    in    all    other    lines    of    medical 


190  HYDROPHOBIA 

science  it  is  pitifully  behind  the  date  in  clinging  to  this  relic  of  the  queer 
superstition  of  ancient  times. 

"Pasteur  was  fascinated — or  shall  I  say  hypnotized? — by  the  sensa- 
tionalism and  mystery  of  the  belief.  It  is  most  likely  due  to  the  latter 
element  that  the  universe  has  not  become  emancipated  from  such  super- 
stitions as  are  involved  in  the  'rabies'  or  hydrophobia  hoax,  which  really 
belong  to  medieval  history. 

"Take  a  practical,  up-to-date  view  of  the  matter.  All  epidemic  dis- 
orders should  be  accompanied  with  evidences  approaching  in  exactitude, 
at  least,  a  degree  of  mathematical  proof.  'Rabies'  has  not,  while  all  others 
have.  The  symptoms  observed  during  life,  as  well  as  the  signs  found  in 
the  dead  body,  in  such  diseases  as  smallpox,  typhus  fever  and  cholera,  for 
instance,  are  characteristic,  decisive  and  constant.  The  symptoms  in  'rabies' 
in  man  are  extremely  vague,  conflicting  and  ,  inconsistent,  and,  further- 
more, post-mortem  study  in  man,  as  well  as  in  canine,  has  yielded  no  re- 
sult of  other  than  negative  value. 

"Much  of  the  observation  made  of  queer-acting  dogs  is  made  through 
optics  disturbed  by  fear,  and  by  persons  who  are  incompetent  to  judge 
what  they  see,  consequently  if  a  canine  froth  at  the  mouth,  run  with  his 
tongue  out  and  carry  his  tail  drawn  under  his  body  he  has  the  rabies,  and 
the  revolver  or  policeman's  polished  baton  is  uncermoniously  called  into 
service. 

"What  nonsense!  Such  signs  have  been  observed  in  dogs  that  have 
merely  been  chased  or  beaten,  or  that  are  afflicted  with  ordinary  canine 
diseases.  What  if  they  are  taken  to  a  water  trough  and  go  into  convulsions 
when  they  see  the  liquid.  They  are  overheated  and  at  a  high  tension 
of  nervous  excitement.  Accordingly  they  conceive  a  craving  for  water,  yet 
in  such  a  state  they  are  unable  to  compose  themselves  sufficiently  to  par- 
take of  it,  and  so  the  unquenchable  craving  throws  them  into  the  dread- 
ful paroxysms  which  decides  their  fate. 

"The  same  explanation  serves  for  the  supposed  sufferers  of  rabies  in 
man.  Any  human  being  suspected  to  be  infected  with  rabies  who  is  men- 
tally weak  enough  to  work  up  a  like  nervous  excitement  to  that  I  have 
j-ust  cited  in  the  canine  will  suffer  parallel  symptoms;  the  others  bitten 
by  so-called  rabid  mad  dogs  will  suffer  no  ill  effects  unless  it  be  from 
blood  poisoning,  infected  by  decayed  teeth  in  the  animal's  mouth.  In  the 
latter  case  the  water  symptoms  do  not  present  themselves  if  the  afflicted 
are  strong  enough  in  mind  to  keep  control  of  their  nervous  systems. 

"I  believe  that  many  of  the  sufferers  who  develop  the  imaginary  dis- 
eases were  bitten  by  animals  suffering  not  from  rabies,  but  from  epilepsy 
or  from  gastro  intestinal  disease;  nay,  even  by  healthy  dogs.  The  serious- 
ness and  oft-times  fatal  influence  of  terror  and  expectant  attention,  fos- 
tered by  the  excitement  of  popular  alarm  is  equally  attested  by  other 
epidemics  of  imitative  nervous  disorder,  and  is  a  familiar  fact  to  those 
who  have  carefully  and  scientifically  studied  the  possible  influences  of 
mind  on  the  body. 

"From  as  far  back  as  the  fifteenth  century,  when  the  Alsatian  pheas- 
ants imagined  they  were  changed  to  wolves,  ran  on  all  fours,  howling 
demonically  and  tearing  children  to  pieces,  and  insisting  that  their  limbs 
be  lopped  off  in  order  to  convince  others  that  the  wolfish  fur  grew 
inward  from  their  skins,  to  the  present  day  when  those  dreading  hydro- 
phobia bark  and  snarl  like  dogs,  mew  and  spit  like  cats  and  are  thrown 
into  convulsions  at  sight  of  water,  the  records  of  the  disorder  are  replete 
to  overflowing  with  delusion,  superstition,  hysteria  and  unconscious  simu- 
lation. 

"The  tragi-comical  case  of  a  number  of  persons  dying  in  the  sixteenth 
century,  after  having  eaten  of  a  pig  that  had  been  bitten  by  a  dog,  which 
in  turn  had  been  bitten  by  another  and  believed  to  be  a  rabid  one,  found 
its  counterpart  a  short  time  ago  in  Russia,  where  a  medical  editor  and  a 
prominent  follower  of  Pasteur  suggested  the  treating  of  a  number  of  per- 
sons in  the  Pasteur  Institute  at  Odessa  for  no  better  reason  than  that 
they  had  partaken  of  milk  from  a  cow  bitten  by  a  suspicious  acting  dog. 


HYDROPHOBIA  191 

"In  order  to  determine  how  great  the  danger  from  'rabies'  was  in 
the  United  States  about  ten  years  ago,  when  Pasteurism  was  popularized 
in  the  country,  I  carefully  followed  up  all  the  newspaper  and  medical  jour- 
nal reports  of  alleged  outbreaks  of  the  malady,  and  in  not  a  single  case 
was  satisfactory  evidence  of  its  existence  obtained.  The  reported  outbreaks 
were  mostly  located  in  or  near  two  centers,  Newark  and  Chicago.  In  the 
epidemic  at  Niles  Centre,  seven  miles  from  Chicago,  which  led  to  a  wild 
hunt  and  slaughter  of  the  innocent  canines  in  that  village,  the  human 
subjects  were  successfully  cured  by  the  'madstone' — a  harmless  species  of 
the  'faith  cure'  in  this  case.  But  the  subsidence  of  the  panic  was  mostly 
due  to  a  sensible  physician  who  declined  to  .make  a  premature  diagnosis. 

"At  Newark,  scientific  tests  were  made,  which  showed  that  neither 
the  persons  dying  of  alleged  'rabies,'  the  dogs  that  had  bitten  them,  nor  the 
children  reputed  to  have  been  saved  by  the  Pasteur  treatment,  had  been 
afflicted  with  any  such  disease. 

"Prof.  Briggs,  of  the  Carnegie  Laboratory,  and  Law,  of  Cornell,  inoc- 
culated  dogs  with  material  from  the  deceased  pound-keeper,  Neall,  as  I 
did   from  the  deceased   Hertlin,  and   in   every  case  with  negative  results. 

"The  veterinarian,  Runge,  kept  the  clogs  bitten  by  the  suspected  animal 
in  .quarantine  for  four  months  and  then  discharged  them  as  not  'rabid.' 
Some  children  bitten  by  the  same  dog  and  not  treated  by  Pasteur  are  today 
known  to  me.  They  are  as  free  from  disease  as  those  who  were  sub- 
jected to  the  treatment. 

"Scores  of  observations  might  be  added  in  bringing  the  review  up  to 
date,  all  of  which  tend  to  show  that  the  cases  reported,  including  the  eight 
Baltimore  victims,  were  not  sufferers  of  any  trumped-up  malady  as  'rabies.' 
From  what  I  have  learned  of  those  of  the  latter  who  died  after  receiving 
the  Pasteur  treatment,  I  should  say  they  were  poisoned,  either  by  the 
inoculations  or  by  ptomaines  from  decayed  teeth  of  the  suspicious  canine 
that  bit  them.  Of  the  others  who  are  believed  to'  have  been  saved  from 
the  dreadful  disease  by  Gibier's  hand,  I  am  satisfied  that  in  biting  them 
the  animal  didn't  happen  to  get  any  of  the  poisonous  saliva  in  the  wound 
or  that  their  systems  were  not  susceptible  to  the  dangers  of  the  Pasteur 
inoculation.  Science  has  proved  that  what  is  harmless  to  some  persons 
may  be  deadly  to  others.  The  followers  of  the  Pasteur  treatment,  how- 
ever,  disregard   this   established   fact. 

"In  Pennsylvania  a  number  of  persons  were  needlessly  rendered  un- 
happy by  a  sensational  report  to  the  effect  that  'rabies'  had  become  epi- 
demic in  one  of  the  State's  prosperous  villages.  A  large  number  of  school 
children  and  several  adults  had  been  infected  by  dog  bites.  After  several 
of  the  children  and  two  of  the  adults  had  died,  the  dog — which  was  a  pet — 
was  located.  The  animal  was  found  to  be  suffering  from  epileptic  fits, 
induced  by  his  having  swallowed  a  chicken  bone.  The  deaths  caused  by 
the  bites  were  undoubtedly  due  to  the  same  cause  as  I  have  explained  in 
regard   to   the   Baltimore  victims. 

"As  a  whole,  in  all  the  cases  reported  as  'lyssa,'  'rabies'  or  'hydropho- 
bia,' it  was  either  not  shown  that  the  subject  had  been  bitten  by  a  dog  at 
all,  or  that  the  dog  had  been  mad  in  the  Pasteur  sense.  Indeed,  the 
errors  that  have  been  committed  in  this  direction  would  be  amusing  were 
it  not  for  other  and  tragical  attendant  features. 

"Let  it  be  inoculated  in  the  public  mind  that  the  sensational  symp- 
toms which  tradition  assigns  to  rabies  are  fictitious,  and,  like  the  fear  of 
water  which  has  given  a  name  to  the  malcondition,  never  occurs  after  the 
bite  of  a  dog;  that  it  is  no  more  possible  for  a  dog  to  inoculate  a  man 
with  the  tendency  to  bark  and  run  on  all  faurs  than  it  is  for  a  man  to 
inoculate  a  dog  with  the  faculty  of  speech  and  an  upright  gait — then  what 
has  been  drifting  through  medical  and  newspaper  literature  as  rabies  would 
disappear. 

"If  once  thoroughly  understood  by  the  people  at  large,  that  supersti- 
tious fear  and  expectant  attention  may  not  alone  develop  serious  nervous 
symptoms,  but,  also  actually  cause  death,  many  who  assume  themselves 
threatened  with  some  rational  ill  effects,  such  as  ptomaine  poisoning  after  a 


192  .  "  HYDROPHOBIA 

dog  bite,  would  cultivate  that  healthful  self-control,  which  was  so  happily 
inoculated  by  Dr.  James  Gordon  Spencer  in  the  Watertown  case,  and  Dr. 
Exton  in  the  Arlington  case." 

Herewith  is  reproduced  Hugh  Dalziel's  entire  treatise  on  this  subject. 
He  is  a  noted  authority  in  England  and  the  author  of  several  books  on 
dogs  and  horses.  You  will  see  that  he  believes  in  hydrophobia,  so  you 
have  now  both  sides  of  the  question  to  read,  ponder  over  and  digest  so  as 
to  get  a  full  and  complete  idea  of  the  matter  in  all  its  bearings; 

"Although  the  symptoms  of  this  terrible  disease  have  long  been  recog- 
nized and  clearly  stated  by  scentfic  men,  there  is  still,  unfortunately,  great 
ignorance  regarding  it  evinced  by  the  general  public — an  ignorance  fraught 
with  much  danger  to  man,  and  the  cause  of  much  cruelty  and  death,  often 
most  brutally  inflicted  on  hundreds  of  poor  dogs,  more  innocent  of  mad- 
ness than  the  frantic  crowd  who  do  their  best  to  hunt  the  poor  frightened, 
nervous  beast  into  that  state. 

"I  have  found  the  prevailing  idea  of  a  mad  dog  to  be  that  of  an 
animal  with  glaring,  bloodshot  eyes,  covered  with  the  froth  of  his  excite- 
ment, and  rushing  wildly  hither  and  thither  in  search  of  man  or  beast 
to  bite;  whilst  a  dog  lost  in  a  crowded  town,  and  excitedly  nervous  finding 
himself  out  of  his  knowledge,  is  often  enough  to  raise  the  croy  of  'a  mad 
dog,'  and  with  many  a  fit  is  a  sign  positive,  and  the  occurrence  of  epilepsy 
has  been   the  incitement  to   canine  murder  in  numberless  instances.  . 

"It  is  quite  true  that  the  disease  produces  great  nervous  excitement, 
and  creates  a  spirit  of  unrest — it  also,  in  the  first  stages  of  its  existence, 
increases  the  flow  of  saliva — but  not  the  emission  of  froth  from  the  mouth, 
which  is  produced  by  the  champing  of  the  jaws  in  an  epileptic  fit;  in  rabies, 
the  discharge  becomes  thick  and  glutinous,  and  the  sufferer  may  be  seen 
paw'ng  at  his  mouth  to  clear  it,  as  though  choked  with  a  bone.  The  dispo- 
sition of  the  dog  is  often  entirely  changed,  and  one  frolicsome  and  fond  of 
being  caressed  may  become  sullen  and  shy,  retiring  into  some  quiet  lair, 
generally  selecting  some  dark  corner,  behind  a  large  object.  If  out  on  the 
march  he  will  rather  evade  man  than  seek  company;  and  although  biting 
furiously  at  all  and  everything  that  obstructs  his  passage,  rarely  going  out 
of  his  way  to  seek  an  enemy.  He  evinces  a  strong  desire  to  tear  and  gnaw 
everything  he  gets  hold  of;  nothing  comes  amiss  to  him,  and  the  dispo- 
sition to  bite  is  shown  by  his  frequently  snapping  at  imaginary  objects 
in  the  air.  Contrary  to  the  generally  received  -opinion,  and  condemnatory 
of  the  name  hydrophobia,  erroneously  given  to  this  disease  in  the  dog,  the 
poor  sufferer  laps  water  greedily  as  long  as  his  power  over  the  muscles  is 
retained,  and  #hen  that  is  gone,  plunges  his  head  into  the  water  to  cool 
his  parched  and  burning  mouth.  In  the  latter  stages,  the  dog  may  have 
convulsions,  but  fits  are  not  a  premonitory,  nor  an  early  symptom,  and  their 
presence,  independent  of  more  certain  evidence  of  rabies,  should  never  give 
rise  to  fear. 

"I  can  not  do  more  than  to  indicate  the  more  prominent  and  well- 
known  certain  symptoms,  and  those  who  wish  for  fuller  information  on 
the  subject  should  consult  the  works  of  Youatt,  and  the  more  recent  book 
of  Dr.  Fleming. 

"Whilst  too  great  care  and  caution  cannot  be  used  in  dealing  with  a 
disease  so  dangerous,  I  wish  to  warn  my  readers  against  that  unnecessary 
and  hysterical  alarm  which  dethrones  the  reason,  and  predisposes  to  the 
gravest  results.  If  there  be  reason  to  suspect  a  dog  of  madness,  if  his 
natural  disposition  appears  changed  without  a  traceable  cause,  if  he  tears 
and  bites  at  his  bedding,  pieces  of  wood,  carpets,  dirt,  etc.,  if  he  be  seen 
to  paw  at  his  mouth  frequently,  whilst  no  obstructive  articles  is  in  his 
throat,  if  at  intervals  he  snaps  and  bites  savagely  at  objects  real  and 
imaginary,  if,  after  these  paroxysms,  he  be  seen  to  stagger  and  fall,  if  he 
show  an  insatiable  thirst — if  any  or  all  of  these  symptoms  be  present,  shut 
him  up  where  he  can  do  no  harm,  and  call  in  to  your  aid  a  verterinary 
surgeon.  By  allowing  Him  to  study  the  case,  you  will  do  a  public  good; 
for  fortunately,  cases  of  rabies  are  very  rare,  and  it  is  only'  by  the  careful 


HYDROPHOBIA  193 

investigation    of   them   by   men   specially   educated    to   undertake    the   duty, 
that  we  can  ever  hope  to  discover  a  cure. 

"Among  the  numerous  superstitions  that  hang  like  clouds  round  ca- 
nine madness,  obscuring  any  possibility  of  a  clear  view  of  it,  1  will  refer 
to  one  only,  most  of  them  being  altogether  unworthy  of  notice.  It  has 
long  been  a  popular  belief  that  a  person  bitten  by  a  dog,  even  if  the. ani- 
mal be  in  perfect  health  at  the  time,  is  never  safe  from  an  attack  of 
rabies  so  long  as  the  dog  lives;  for  it  is  held,  that  should  the  dog  become 
mad  at  any  future  period,  however  distant,  the  person  bitten  will  also  fall 
a  victim  to  the  disease.  Cases  supposed  to  prove  that  rabies  may  be  com- 
municated by  a  dog  free  from  it  are  constantly  cropping  up,  and  I  know 
of  a  case  of  a  woman  who  is  said  to  have  died  from  hydrophobia,  caused 
by  the  bite  of  a  dog  that  was  clearly  proved  to  be  free  from  rabies  at  the 
time,  and  has  remained  so  ever  since.  The  woman,  it  appears,  was  in  an 
upper  room  with  her  child,  and  the  entrance  of  a  small  dog  so  alarmed 
her  for  her  child's  safety  that  she  seized  the  intruder  and  threw  it  out  of 
the  window,  and  was  bitten  in  the  struggle;  the  woman  was  taken  ill  and 
died,  showing  all  the  symptoms  of  hydrophobia,  and  the  surgeon  who  at- 
tended her  certified  that  death  was  from  that  disease.  1  do  not  intend  to 
dispute  the  opinion  thus  given,  but  I  venture  to  say  had  the  whole  facts 
of  the  case  been  carefully  investigated,  say,  by  a  jury  of  physicians  of 
experience,  it  would  have  proved  that  the  bite  of  that  dog  had  but  a  small 
share  in  causing  the  woman's  death.  To  me  it  appears  as  reasonable 
to  believe  that  the  dog  could  have  bitten  the  woman  without  being  in  the 
same  room  with  her,  as  that  the  bite  could  communicate  rabies  when  the 
disease  did  not  at  that  time  exist.  Such  cases  should  not  be  passed  by, 
but  thoroughly  sifted  by  qualiled  men,  that  the  truth  might  be  elicited  and 
the  fears  of  the  nervous  allayed.  The  practical  lesson  to  be  learned  from 
this  is,  care  and  caution  in  dealing  with  dogs,  especially  strange  ones,  and 
to  curb  unnecessary  alarm,  which  often  brings  about  the  evil  it  would 
avoid.  When  an  accident  does  occur,  have  the  wound  promptly  cauterized 
to  its  full  depth  with  caustic,  and  let  nervous,  in  addition,  obtain  medical 
advice. 

"I  recommend  those  having  much  to  do  with  dogs  to  carry  in  the 
pocket  at  all  times  one  of  those  wooden  cases  of  caustic  which  costs  but 
sixpence,  and  with  this  safeguard  about  them,  and  the  presence  of  mind 
and  nerve  to  use  it  promptly  and  thoroughly — taking  care  the  caustic 
reaches  as  deep  as  the  tooth  did — the  bite  even  of  a  mad  dog  will  do  them 
no  harm. 

"Since  the  above  was  written,  ten  years  ago,  rabies  in  dogs  has  un- 
fortunately been  rather  frequent,  and  a  few  years  ago  from  the  number 
of  deaths  from  hydrophobia,  caused  by  the  bites  from  mad  dogs,  quite  a 
panic  arose,  with  the  result  that  the  attention  of  medical  men  and  vet- 
erarians  at  home  and  abroad  has  been  very  much  directed  to  its  nature; 
as  yet,  however,  no  cure  has  been  discovered,  and  I  see  no  reason  to 
alter  what  I  have  already  said;  but  it  will  be  useful  very  briefly  to  notice 
one  or  two  points  of  special  interest.  Latest  researches  seem  to  point 
conclusively  that  the  rabid  poison  exists  in  the  saliva,  and  in  none  of  the 
other   secretions. 

"Although  its  propagation  by  a  bite  or  by  the  poisoned  saliva  coming 
in  contact  with  an  abraised  or  highly  vascular  surface  are  clearly  enough 
the  means  of  transmission  and  propagation,  how  it  originates  is  unknown; 
exposure  to  great  heat,  feeding  on  salt  meat,  compelled  abstinence  from 
water,  and  many  other  causes,  have  been  suggested  as  a  producing  cause, 
but  proved  not  to  be  so.  The  old  notion  that  it  is  peculiarly  a  disease  of 
the  dog  days,  is  fabulous,  nor  is  it  connected  with  the  functions  of  procrea- 
tion, further  than  the  present  law  in  this  country  permits  owners  of  bitches 
when  in  season  to  be  fought  over  by  excited  males,  furnishes  excellent  op- 
portunities for  its  spread  as  well  as  being  an  insult  to  decency.  It  is  the 
duty  of  men  who  keep  dogs  to  have  some  knowledge  of  their  nature,  and 
the  law  should  punish  the  ignorance  or  carelessness  that  causes  an  offense 
and  a  danger  to  the  public. 


194  HYDROPHOBIA       • 

"Unfortunately  no  cures  are  yet  known;  such  things  as  the  Birling 
and  the  Webb's  cures,  and  other  pretended  family  secrets  may  be  swept 
aside.  Medical  men  have  tried  every  conceivable  drug,  and  a  few  years 
ago  it  was  thought  that  a  specific  had  been  found  in  curari,  but  it  proved 
delusive.  Hot  and  vapor  baths  have  their  votaries,  just  as  half  drowning  in 
Crib,  a  pool  in  the  Severn,  was  at  one  time  believed  in. 

"Preventive  measures  are  alone  to  be  relied  on,  and  the  very  old  one 
of  the  Greeks,  sucking  the  part,  is  excellent,  and  a  small  instrument  has 
been  invented  which  can  be  easily  used;  it  is  like  an  old-fashioned  breast 
exhauster,  with  the  bell-shaped  head  and  long  tube,  but  with  a  round  bell 
half  way  up  the  tube  as  well,  which  of  course  receives  all  that  the  operator 
sucks  out  of  the  wound  and  renders  him  quite  free  from  danger.  It  is 
made  by  a  chemist  in  York,  and  can  be  bought  through  Maw,  Son  &  Com- 
pany,  Aldergate  street,   London." 

Here  is  a  sensible  article  on  hydrophobia,  published  in  Man's  Best 
Friend,  being  an  interview  with  'John  P.  Haines,  of  New  York  City,  the 
President  of  the  American  Society  for  the  Prevention  of  Cruelty  to  Ani- 
mals, a  man  who  has  had  considerable  experience: 

"Hydrophobia  is  one  of  the  rarest  of  diseases,  and  it  is  the  height  of 
folly  to  imagine  that  every  dog  that  happens  to  suffer  intensely  from  the 
heat  is  either  mad  or  in  danger  of  going  mad.  A  mad  policeman  is  every 
bit  as  dangerous  as  a  mad  dog,  and  probably  in  the  past  quite  as  many  of 
the  former  as  of  the  latter  have  been  mad." 

"Mr.  Haines  quotes  from  high  authorities  when  he  says  that  in  ninety- 
nine  cases  out  of  a  hundred  the  poor  brute  which  is  destroyed  while  sup- 
posedly in  the  throes  of  rabies  is  merely  suffering  from  excitement  which 
will  cur?  itself,  and  that  a  person  bitten  by  an  animal  under  such  circum- 
stances is  absolutely  in  no  danger  of  serious  results  unless  he  permits  him- 
self to  become  a  victim  of  his  own  disordered  imagination.  Mr.  Haines  is 
himself  authority  for  the  statement  that  the  cases  of  death  from  hydropho- 
bia reported  from  time  to  time  are  wrongly  diagnosed,  and  that,  as  a  rule, 
they  result  simply  from  worry.  The  weather  has  nothing  to  do  with  the 
case,  although  no  doubt  dogs  are  less  liable  to  sickness  in  cold  weather  than 
during  the  hot  spell,  a  state  of  affairs  due  perhaps  almost  as  much  to  the 
thoughtlessness  or  ignorance  of  their  owners  as  to  the  weather  conditions. 

"A  dog  that  has  been  properly  fed  and  is  being  so  fed,  will  suffer 
much  less  discomfort  than  another  which  has  been  stuffed  with  food  calcu- 
lated to  heat  the  blood,  and  such  a  dog  is,  and  especially  when  not  over- 
weight, far  more  liabel  to  escape  illness  than  the  fat,  badly-conditioned 
animal  that  is  quite  'above  himself,'  and  ready  to  go  wrong  at  any  time. 

"What  are  the  dog  days?  They  are  the  heated  term  in  July  and  Au- 
gust, during  which  dogs  are  supposed  to  be  peculiarly  liable  to  rabies,  or 
canine  madness.  That  is  one  answer,  but  there  is  a  better.  There  are  no 
dog  days,  because  there  is  no  time  of  the  year  when  dogs  are  especially 
liable  to  rabies.  There  are  no  more  cases  of  rabies  in  July  and  August 
than  in  December  and  January.  Moreover,  rabies  is  one  of  the  rarest  of 
canine  diseases.  When  you  hear  a  cry  of  'Mad  Dog!'  the  chances  are 
many  thousands  to  one  that  the  dog  is  not  mad.  When  you  read  in  the 
papers  of  someone  being  bitten  by  a  mad  dog  the  chances  are  thousands 
to  one  it  is  not  true.  A  person  bitten  by  a  mad  dog  is  not  doomed  to 
die  a  fearful  death  by  hydrophobia.  Not  at  all,  for  hydrophobia  in  a  hu- 
man being  is  much  more  rare  than  rabies  in  a  dog.  Expert  physicians 
who  have  given  special  attention  to  the  subject  are  convinced  that  hydro- 
phobia is  never  caused  by  the  bite  of  a  dog,  but  is  simply  a  hysterical 
nervous  disease  caused  by  an  unfounded  dread.  Don't  take  this  for  grant- 
ed;   but   remember   these    facts: 

"First,  That  there  are  more  than  a  million  chances  to  one  that  any 
dog  which  is  supposed  to  be  mad  is  not  mad  at  all;  second,  that,  in  all 
probability,  any  dog  by  which  a  person  may  happen  to  be  bitten  is  not 
mad;  and  third,  that  even  if  a  person  is  bitten  by  a  dog  that  is  really 
mad,   the  danger  of  hydrophobia  is  very  slight  indeed. 

"If  you  will  note  the  following  facts  you  will  probably  find  them  to 


HYDROPHOBIA  195 

be  quite  different  from  the  popular  fancies  by  which  most  persons  are  mis- 
led. It  is  supposed  that  a  mad  dog  dreads  water.  It  is  not  so.  The  mad 
dog  is  very  likely  to  plunge  his  head  to  the  eyes  in  water,  though  he 
cannot  swallow  it,  and  laps  it  with  difficulty.  It  is  supposed  that  a  mad 
dog  runs  about  with  evidences  of  intense  excitement.  It  is  not  so.  The. 
mad  dog  never  runs  about  in  agitation;  he  never  gallops;  he  is  always 
alone,  usually  in  a  strange  .place,  where  he  jogs  along  slowly.  If  he  is 
approached  by  a  dog  or  man  he  shows  no  signs  of  excitement,  but  when 
the  dog  or  man  is  near  enough  he  snaps  and  resumes  his  solitary  trot. 
If  a  dog  barks,  yelps,  whines  or  growls,  that  dog  is  not  mad.  The  only 
sound  a  mad  clog  is  ever  known  to  emit  is  a  hoarse  howl,  and  that  but 
seldom.  Even  blows  will  not  extort  an  outcry  from  a  mad  dog.  There-' 
fore*,  if  any  dog,  under  any  circumstances,  utters  any  other  sound  than 
that  of  a  hoarse  howl,  that  dog  is  not  mad.  It  is  supposed  that  the  mad 
dog  froths  at  the  mouth.  It  is  not  so.  If  a  dog's  jaws  are  covered  or 
flecked  with  white  froth,  that  dog  is  not  mad.  The  surest  of  all  signs  that 
a  dog  is  mad  is  a  thick  and  ropy  brown  mucous  clinging  to  his  lips,  which 
he  often  tries  vainly  to  tear  away  with  his  paws  or  wash  away  with  wa- 
ter. If  your  dog  is  bitten  by  any  other  dog,  watch  him  carefully.  If  he 
is  infected  by  rabies  you  will  discover  signs  of  it  possibly  in  from  six  to 
ten  days.  Then  he  will  be  restless,  often  getting  up  only  to  lie  down 
again,  changing  his  position  impatiently,  turning  from  side  to  side,  and 
constantly  licking  or  scratching  some  part  of  his  head,  limbs  or  body. 
He  will  be  irritable  and  inclined  to  dash  at  other  animals,  and  he  will 
sometimes  snap  at  objects  which  he  imagines  to  be  near  him.  He  will  be 
excessively  thirsty,  lapping  water  eagerly  and  often.  Then  there  will  be 
glandular  swellings  about  his  jaws  and  throat,  and  he  will  vainly  endeavor 
to  rid  himself  of  a  thick,  ropy,  mucous  discharge  from  his  mouth  and 
throat.  If  he  can,  he  will  probably  stray  away  from  home  and  trot  slowly 
and  mournfully  along  the  highway  or  across  the  country,  meddling  with 
neither  man  nor  beast,  unless  they  approach  him,  and  then  giving  a  single 
snap.  The  only  exception  to  this  behavior  occurs  in  ferocious  dogs,  which, 
during  the  earlier  stage  of  excitement,  may  attack  any  living  object  in 
sight.  These  symptoms  of  rabies  are  condensed  from  valuable  information 
received    from   physicians   of   undoubted   authority." 

The  following  interesting  article  was  written  by  Mrs.  Sarah  K.  Bol- 
ton, the  eminent  authoress,  who  has  written  many  books  on  animals,  and 
who  is  a  great  friend  of  dogs,  is  clearly  entitled  to  space  in  this  book. 
Mrs.  Bolton's  last  book,  "Our  Devoted  Friend,  the  Dog,"  should  be  read 
by  every  dog  lover.  It  is  published  by  L.  C.  Page  &  Co.,  Boston,  Mass.- 
Send  and  get  it. 

"Almost  weekly  or  monthly  in  summer  we  have  a  'mad  dog'  scare. 
Some  dog  has  been  frothing  at  the  mouth,  which  is  never  a  sign  of  rabies, 
but  of  sickness  or  a  fit;  is  chased  by  a  crowd  and  after  crawling  under 
some  porch  or  shed  for  protection,  is  killed  by  the  random  and  numerous 
shots   of  some   policemen. 

"We  ought  to  learn  from  the  experience  of  others  that  there  is  very 
little  danger  from  the  bite  of  a  dog.  Let  any  person  ask  a  dozen  men 
if  they  have  ever  been  bitten  by  a  dog  and  probably  more  than  half  will 
say  yes,  in  boyhood  or  later  in  life,  with  no  evil  results  whatever. 

"Dr.  Gordon  Stables,  a  prominent  Englishman,  says:  'All  my  life  I 
have  been  among  dogs.  I  have  written  five  books  on  them.  I  have  han- 
dled as  many  as  30,000  dogs  a  year.  I  have  been  bitten  very  often,  and 
care  no  more  for  a  bite  than  I  do  for  the  scratch  of  a  pin;  yet  I  have 
never  seen  a  case  of  rabies,  and  I  do  not  believe  such  exists.' 

"Surgeon  General  Thornton  says:  'I  have  served  in  India  for  thirty- 
five  years,  and  was  for  many  years  in  medical  charge  of  a  large  Indian 
district,  with  a  population  of  2,000,000.  Six  dispensaries  where  about 
100,000  people  were  treated  annually  were  under  my  superintendence, 
yet,  although  dog  bites  were  frequent,  I  never  met  a  single  case  of  hydro- 
phobia in  a  native  Indian,  and  I  believe  that  the  experience  of  others  who 
have  been  civil  surgeons  in  India  is  similar  to  mine.' 


19G  iTYDROPITOmA. 

"Dr.  Stockweii,  a  celebrated  authority  on  dog  disease,  says:  'Distem- 
per, toothache,  earache,  epilepsy  and  the  whole  class  of  nervous  diseases  to 
which  dogs  are  subject  are  constantly  taken  for  rabies.  Personally,  after 
moio  than  thirty  years'  experience  as-  a  dog  owner  and  student  of  canine 
and  comparative  medicine,  I  have  yet  to  meet  with  a  genuine  case  of  rabies 
in  the  dog,  and  of  some  scores  of  so-called  rabid  dogs  submitted  to  me 
for  inspection  I  have  found  one  and  all  to  be  suffering  from  other  and 
comparatively    innocent   diseases.' 

"Dr.  Charles  W  .Dulles,  the  eminent  lecturer  on  the  History  of  Medi- 
cine at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  says:  'After  16  years  of  investigation' 
'he  has  failed  to  find  a  single  case  of  hydrophobia  'that  can  be  conclusively 
proved  to  have  resulted  from  the  bite  of  a  dog  or  any  other  cause.' 

Dr.  Dulles  says  in  regard  to  thej.reatment  of  a  dog  bite:  "I  am  strong- 
ly opposed  to  the  practice  of  cauterizing  with  silver  nitrate.  I  have  seen 
and  treated  very  many  dog  bites,  and  have  not  used  lunar  caustic  for  13 
years,  and  no  person  that  I  have  treated  has  yet  developed  hydrophobia, 
or  that  the  mortality  of  those  treated  by  me  is  less  than  that  of  those 
treated  in  Pasteur  institutes.  My  treatment  is  simply  through  surgical 
cleaning  and  the  application  of  a  simple  antiseptic  dressing  for  a  few 
days,  with  the  positive  assurance  that  there  will  be  no  danger  of  any  dis- 
ease." 

Dr.  Irving  C.  Rosse  says  in  a  paper  read  before  the  American  Neuro- 
logical Association,  Philadelphia,  June  3,  1895:  "In  Asia  Minor  and  in 
Constantinople,  the  home  of  pariah  dogs,  one  never  hears  of  hydrophobia. 
The  secretary  of  the  Japanese  legation  in  Washington  tells  me  that  he  has 
never  known  of  the  disease  in  Japan,  and  that  in  Korea,  with  more  dogs 
than  any  other  country,  such  a  thing  as  hydrophobia  is  unheard  of.  In 
London,  with  its  five  and  one-half  million  inhabitants?  but  one  case  was 
reported  in   1892." 

Dr.  Dulles  finds  from  statistics  gathered  in  the  United  States,  that 
there  is  only  one  hydrophobia  case  to  four  million  inhabitants.  Of  267  per- 
sons in  the  U.  S.  bitten  by  dogs  supposed  to  be  rabid,  he  says  only  eight 
persons  have  died.  • 

Many  of  the  best  physicians  recommended  hot  water  baths  for  dog 
bites,  as  is  done  in  India,  rather  than  the  Pasteur  system,  with  its  great 
expense  and  doubtful  results.  Professor  Peter,  the  able  editor  of  the  French 
Medical  Journal,  says:  "M.  Pasteur  does  not  cure  hydrophobia — he  gives 
it!"  A  physician  describes  the  system  as  the  "inoculating  usually  wholly 
uncontaminated  human  beings  with  the  most  terrible  virus  known  to  science 
— to-wit,  that  of  hydrophobia." 

"The  Pasteur  advocates  admit  that  only  from  5  to  10  per  cent  of  per- 
sons bitten  by  a  rabid  animal  ever  have  hydrophobia,  with  no  treatment 
whatever.  The  writer  of  this  article  has  been  bitten  several  times,  and 
would  never  allow  the  wound  to  be  cauterized. 

"Even  if  there  be  such  a  disease  as  hydrophobia  in  man,  which  is 
probably  blood  poisoning  (  a  thorn  of  a  rose,  the  prick  of  a  pin,  the  scratch 
of  a  baby's  finger  nail,  the  point  of  a  lead  pencil  stuck  behind  the  ear,  the 
cut  on  the  neck  of  a  stiff  linen  collar  have  all  produced  blood  poisoning), 
and  if  there  be  such  a  disease  as  rabies  in  a  dog,  which  is  probably  dis- 
temper or  epilepsy,  it  does  not  seem  to  be  found  among  the  homeless  or 
unlicensed  dogs,  or  those  that  roam  the  streets,  which  are  the  ones  killed 
from   the  cruel   supposition    that   they  especially  are   dangerous. 

"Dr.  Matthew  Woods,  of  Philadelphia,  says:  'At  the  Philadelphia  dog 
pound,  where,  on  an  average,  over  6,000  vagrant  dogs  are  taken  up  an- 
nually, and  where  the  catchers  and  helpers  are  frequently  bitten,  not  one 
case  of  hydrophobia  has  occurred  during  its  entire  history  of  2  5  years,  in 
which  time  150,000  dogs  have  been  handled.' 

"At  the  dog  shelter  in  New  York  City  the  Superintendent  told  me  he 
had  been  bitten  over  a  hundred  times  and  paid  no  attention  to  it  what- 
ever. In  killing  50,000  unlicensed  dogs  each  year,  to  the  great  shame  of  an 
indifferent  money-getting  city,  New  York  has  not  found  one  case  of  rabies. 
London,   Eng.,    kills   nearly   the   same   number,    and   has   not   seen   a   case 


HYDROPHOBIA  "  ~  197 

among  its  unlicensed  clogs.  Among  the  thousands  of  dogs  killed  after  the 
brutal  muzzling  order  in  Washington,  n.  C,  last  year  not  one  case  of  rabies 
was  found.  Let  the  poor  people  keep  dogs.  They  are  good  companions  for 
their  children,  and  do  not  lead  to  the  workhouse  or  the  jail.  They  are  the 
best  guard  for  our  houses  where  there  are  no  police;  indeed  cheaper  than 
policemen,  and  usually  more  easily  found  when  wanted.  We  spend  money 
to  give  playgrounds  and  entertainments  for  children,  and  that  Is  well,  but 
their  dogs  give  them  more  comfort,  usually,  than  almost  any  other  one 
thing,  as  boys  and  girls  will  universally  testify. 

"Let  the  dogs  live.  The  cars  will  necessarily  kill  some.  They  are  not 
long  lived  at  the  best.  They  give  us  devotion,  companionship,  and  ought 
to  make  us  kinder  and  more  gentle,  from  their  helplessness  and  dependence 
upon  us.  They  are  good  friends,  to  some  very  unfeeling  people.  Do  not 
chain  them  up.  Repeal  our  cruel  laws.  Let  us,  a  professedly  Christian  city, 
be  as  humane  as  the  unchristian  Turk,  or  the  worshipers  of  Buddha  in 
India.  Let  us  honor  ourselves  by  doing  justice  to  the  speechless.  Let  the 
dogs  live." 

Here  I  give  a  cure  for  hydrophobia,  a  clipping,  from  a  paper: 

"The  time  between  the  biting  of  an  animal  by  a  mad  dog  and  the  show- 
ing signs  of  hydrophobia  is  not  less  than  nine  days,  but  may  be  nine  months. 
After  the  animal  has  become  rabid  the  scratch  of  a  tooth  upon  a  person  or 
slobber  coming  in  contact  with  a  sore,  or  raw  place,  will  produce  hydropho- 
bia just  the  same  as  if  bitten  by  a  mad  dog. 

"Hydrophob'a  can  be  prevented,  and  I  will  give  what  is  known  to  be 
an  infallible  remedy  for  man  and  beast  if  properly  administered.  A  dose 
for  a  horse  or  cow  should  be  four  times  as  much  as  for  a  person.  It  is 
not  too  late  to  give  the  medicine  any  time  before  the  spasms  come  on. 
The  dose  for  a  person  is  one  and  one-half  ounces  of  elecamnane  root  bruised, 
put  in  a  pint  of  new  milk,  reduced  one-half  by  boil'ng;  take  all  at  once  in 
the  morning,  fasting  until  the  afternoon,  or  at  least  a  very  light  diet  until 
several  hours  are  passed.  The  second  dose  same  as  first,  except  take  two 
ounces  of  the  root.  The  third  same  as  the  second.  Three  doses  are  all 
that  are  needed  and  there  need  be  no  fear,  as  I  know  from  my  own  experi- 
ence, and  know  of  numbers  of  cases  where  it  was  entirely  successful.  This 
is  no  guesswork.  The  persons  alluded  to  had  been  bitten  by  their  own  dogs, 
which  were  then  tied  up  to  see  if  they  were  really  mad.  They  proved  to  be 
mad  and  the  remedy  was  successful.  A  physician  told  me  he  had  known 
of  the  use  of  this  remedy  for  over  thirty  years  and  never  knew  it  to  fail 
when  properly  administered.  He  related  a  case  where  a  number  of  cows 
were  bitten,  and  penned  half  in  one  pen  and  half  in  another;  to  half  the 
remedy  was  given  and  were  saved.     The  other  half  died  from  hydrophobia." 

Let  us  not  become  insane  on  the  hydrophobia  question.  Let  the  dogs 
have  plenty  of  water,  don't  tie  them  up  in  hot  weather,  and  don't  make  the 
poor  animals  chase  for  miles  after  a  bicycle,  carriage  or  electric  car  on  a  hot 
•and  dusty  road.  If  there  is  a  spectacle  humiliating  to  those  who  wish  to 
respect  their  fellow  man.  it  is  the  sight  of  a  dog,  in  the  last  stages  of  ex- 
haustion, struggling  to  keep  up  with  some  vehicle  upon  which  his  selfish 
master  is  taking  his  ease,  unmindful   of  ils  misery. 

The  following  article  was  written  by  D.  E.  Salmon,  D.  V.  M.,  Chief  of 
the  Bureau  of  Animal  Industry,  in  the  Yearbook  of  the  Department  of 
Agriculture,  issued  at  Washington,  D.  C,  and  as  will  be  seen,  he  is  a  firm 
believer  in  rabies.  I  reproduce  it  as  authority  from  the  other  side  of  the 
question. 

This  is  the  concluding  speech  to  the  jury  by  the  "Prosecuting  Attorney," 
whose  duty  it  is  to  always  find  the  prisoner  guilty: 

"The  symptoms  of  rabies  are  such  as  we  should  expect  from  serious 
disease  of  the  central  organs  of  the  nervous  system:  F'rsr,  Irritation;  sec- 
ond, paralysis  and  death.  The  rabies  virus  appears  to  have  little  effect  upon 
the  system  until  it  reaches  the  brain  and  spinal  cord.  There  it  multiplies, 
sets  up  irritation,  and  finally  interrupts  the  functions. 

"Rabies  is  generally  divided  into  two  forms:  First,  furious  rabies; 
second,  dumb  rabies.     In  the  former  the  animal  is  irritable,  aggressive,  and 


198  ,  •      HYDROPHOBIA 

bites  nearly  every  object  which  comes  its  way;  in  the  latter  the  muscles  of 
its  jaw  are  paralyzed  almost  from  the  first  appearance  of  symptoms,  and 
being  unable  to  bite,  the  animal  remains  more  quiet  and  tranquil.  Essen- 
tilly  the.  two  forms  of  the  disease  are  the  same,  but  owing  to  the  parts 
of  the  brain  attacked  and  the  acuteness  of  the  attack,  paralysis  appears 
much  sooner  in  one  of  these  forms  than  in  the  other.  The  saliva  from  a 
case  of  dumb  rabies  is  just  as  dangerous  and  virulent  as  that  from  a  case 
of  furious  rabies.  The  dogs  with  dumb  rabies  are  less  dangerous  simply 
because  they  are  unable  to  bite  and  thus  insert  their  saliva  into  a  wound. 

"The  impression  should  not  be  formed  that  dumb  rabies  and  furious 
rabies  always  represent  two  distinct  types  of  disease,  and  that  one  may  at 
a  glance  classify  every  case  as  belonging  to  one  or  the  other  of  these  types. 
Quite  the  contrary.  The  typical  cases  belong  to  the  two  extremes  of  symp- 
toms, and  there  are  all  graduations  between  the  two.  In  fact,  almost  every 
case  of  furious  rabies  sooner  or  later  change  into  the  dumb  form,  that  is, 
the  final  stage  of  rabies  is  almost  invariably  paralytic,  and  the  dumb  form 
in  its  typical  development  occurs  when  the  paralysis  appears  on  the  first  day 
of  the  disease.  The  paralysis  may  not  appear,  however,  until  the  second, 
or  third,  or  some  subsequent  day. 

"Again  ,a  dog  does  not  necessarily  bite  everything  about  it  even  though 
it  has  rabies  and  its  jaws  are  not  paralyzed.  It  may  be  combative  and 
furious  all  of  the  time,  or  only  a  part  of  the  time,  or  not  at  all.  There  is 
no  disease  in  which  the  symptoms  vary  more  than  in  rabies  of  the  dog, 
and  it  is,  consequently,  impossible  in  any  description  of  moderate  length 
to  give  an  idea  of  the  different  forms  under  which  it  may  appear. 

Furious  Rabies. 

"Fleming  has  well  said  that  it  is  a  great  and  dangerous  error  to  sup- 
pose that  the  disease  commences  with  signs  of  raging  madness,  and  that 
the  earliest  phase  of  the  malady  is  ushered  in  with  fury  and  destruction. 
The  symptoms  appear  very  gradually,  and  at  first  there  is  only  the  slightest 
evidence  of  brain  disease.  The  animal's  habits  and  behavior  are  changed. 
It  may  be  more  restless  and  affectionate  than  usual,  seeking  to  be  near  its 
master  or  mistress,  fawning,  licking  the  hands  or  face",  and  apparently  seek- 
ing for  sympathy  or  assistance.  Such  caresses  are,  however,  extremely 
dangerous,  for  the  animal's  tongue,  moist  with  virulent  saliva,  coming  in 
contact  with  a  part  where  the  skin  is  thin,  abraded,  or  wounded,  may  fatally 
infect  the  person  with  whom  it  is  endeavoring  to  demonstrate  its  affection. 
The  smallest  abrasion  may  be,  as  Bouley  has  impressively  said,  a  door 
opened  to  death;  and  such  a  death!  The  instances  in  which  hydrophobia 
has  developed  from  such  inoculations  are  very  numerous,  and  everyone 
should  be  warned  against  this  kiss  of  affection,  which  carries  with  it  not 
only  death,  but  sufferings  which  are  far  more  to  be  dreaded  than  the  fatal  . 
termination. 

•  "In  most  cases  dogs  first  become  dull,  gloomy,  morose,  taciturn,  seek- 
ing solitude  and  isolation  in  out-oMhe-way  places,  or  retiring  under  pieces 
of  furniture.  But  in  this  retirement  they  can  not  rest;  they  are  uneasy 
and  agitated;  they  lie  down  and  assume  the  attitude  of  repose,  but  in  a 
few  minutes  are  up  again,  walking  hither  and  thither,  'seeking  rest,  but 
finding  none.'  Occasionally  this  restlessness  may  disappear  for  a  time,  and 
the  animal  become  lively  and  affectionate;  oftener  it  sinks  into  a  sullen 
gloominess,  from  which  even  its  master's  voice  rouses  it  but  temporarily. 
It  becomes  more  and  more  desperate  in  its  efforts  to  prepare  a  comfortable 
bed,  pawing  or  scattering  the  straw,  or,  if  in  a  house,  scratching,  tumbling 
and  tearing  cushions,  rugs,  curtains,  carpets  and  everything  of  that  kind 
within  its  reach. 

"At  this  period  dogs  may  have  aberrations  of  the  senses,  of  the  sight, 
hearing,  and  feeling,  which  cause  hallucinations  and  lead  them  to  think 
that  they  are  being  annoyed  by  something,  or  that  some  animal  or  person 
is  endeavoring  to  injure  them.     They  crouch,  ready  to  spring  upon  an  ene- 


HYDROPHOBIA  199 

my;  they  rush  forward  and  snap  at  the  air;  they  throw  theselves,  howling 
and   furious,  against  a  wall,  as  though  they  heard  sounds  beyond   it. 

"While  at  first  the  affected  dog  may  not  be  disposed  to  bite,  it  be- 
comes more  dangerous  as  his  hallucinations  and  delirium  increase.  The 
voice  of  the  master  or  of  an  acquaintance  may  dispel  the  aberrations  tem- 
porarily and  lead  him  to  friendly  demonstrations,  but  an  unexpected  move- 
ment or  touch  may  bring  on  another  access  and  lead  to  a  quick  and  un- 
expected bite. 

"The  disturbance  of  the  sensations  leads  to  chills  and  itching.  If  the 
place  where  the  bite  occurred  is  accessible  the  dog  licks  the  scar,  and 
later  bites  and  tears  the  tissues.  This  tearing  of  the  flesh  is  not  always 
confined  to  the  site  of  the  inoculation,  but  certain  regions  of  the  body 
appear  to  lose  their  sensitiveness,  and  at  the  same  time  to  convey  to  the 
brain  the  sensation  of  itching.  The  animal  in  this  case  bites  into  its  own 
flesh   with  apparent  pleasure  and   satisfaction. 

Such  animals  take  food  until  the  disease  is  considerably  advanced, 
if  it  is  something  which  can  be  swallowed  without  mastication;  other- 
wise it  is  dropped  after  remaining  a  short  time  in  the  mouth. 

"Difficulty  in  swallowing  is  an  early  symptom,  and  frequently  leads 
the  unsuspecting  owner  to  conclude  that  the  animal  has  a  bone  in  his 
throat.  A  dog  which  appears  to  have  a  bone  in  his  throat  is  on  general 
principles  one  of  the  most  dangerous  animals  in  existence.  The  supposed 
bone  may  be  there,  but  on  the  other  hand  the  symptoms  which  lead  to  this 
supposition  may  be  due  to  partial  paralysis  caused  by  rabies,  and  the  owner 
may  be  inoculated  with  the  virulent  saliva  while  thrusting  his  finger  or 
hand  in  the  dog's  mouth  to  discover  a  bone  which  has  no  existence  but  in 
his   imagination. 

"It  is  commonly  believed  that  mad  dogs  have  fear  of  water  and  are 
unable  to  drink,  but  there  could  be  no  greater  mistake.  In  this  respect  they 
differ  entirely  from  the  human  patient.  They  have  no  fear  or  dread  of 
water,  but  continue  to  drink  until  paralysis  has  progressed  so  far  that 
they  are  no  longer  able  to  swallow.  The  fact  that  a  suspected  dog  is 
seen  to  drink  or  to  wade  into  a  stream  is  consequently  no  evidence  that 
he  is  not  mad. 

"When  the  furious  symptoms  come  on,  the  dog  leaves  his  home  and 
goes  upon  a  long  chase,  with  no  apparent  object  in  view  other  than  to  be 
traveling  onward.  He  trots  at  a  rapid  pace,  eye  haggard,  tail  depressed, 
indifferent  to  his  surroundings.  He  flies  at  and  bites  dogs  and  persons 
whom  he  meets,  but  usually  does  not  apparently  search  for  them,  or  even 
notice  them  if  they  remain  quiet.  Dogs  in  this  condition  may  travel  many 
miles,  and  finally  drop  from  exhaustion  and  die.  Often  after  an  absence 
of  a  day  or  two  they  return  to  their  home,  exhausted,  emaciated,  covered 
with  dust  and  blood,  and  presenting  a  most  forlorn  and  miserable  appear- 
ance. Those  who  have  pity  for  such  an  animal  and  try  to  make  it  clean 
and  comfortable,  are  in  great  danger  of  being  bitten,  for  the  disease  has 
advanced  to  a  point  where  the  delirium  or  insanity  is  most  marked,  and 
where  a  treacherous  bite  is  most  common.  Doubtless  the  clog  has  no  in- 
tention of  injuring  a  friend,  and  would  not  do  so  did  he  net  see  that 
friend  transformed  by  his  disordered  vision  into  some  distorted  and  un- 
recognizable shape,  which  he  thinks  is  about  to  injure  him.  But  while 
we  may  give  the  dog  due  credit  for  not  intentionally  and  deliberately 
inoculating  his  friends  with  his  fatal  virus,  let  us  not  forget  that  the 
inoculation  is  no  less  deadly  because  it  is  the  result  of  the  abnormal  working 
of  a  disordered  mind.  Whatever  the  sentiment  may  be  which  leads  the  dog 
to  turn  upon  his  master  or  mistress  and  inflict  an  injury,  the  duty  remains 
the  same  for  the  owner  to  take  due  precautions  to  prevent  such  an  oc- 
currence. 

"If  the  animal,  instead  of  being  allowed  to  escape,  is  kept  confined, 
the  paroxysms  of  fury  are  seen  to  occur  intermittently,  or,  in  the  absence 
of  provacation,  they  may  be  entirely  wanting.  If  excited,  it  howls,  rushes 
upon  objects  that  are  thrust  toward  it,  or  throws  itself  against  the  bars  of 
its  cage  and  bites  with  great  fury. 


200  HYDROPHOBIA 

"As  death  approaches,  the  animal  becomes  exhausted  and  scarcely 
able  to  stand;  the  eyes  are  dull  and  sunken,  and  the  expression  is  that  of 
pain  and  despair.  Paralysis  appears  in  the  jaws  or  in  the  posterior  ex- 
tremities and  extends  rapidly  to  other  parts  of  the  body.  The  animal,  be- 
ing unable  to  stand,  lies  extended  upon  its  side;  the  respiration  becomes 
more  and  more  difficult;  there  are  spasmodic  contractions  of  certain  groups 
of  muscles,  complete  prostration,  and  death. 

"The  ordinary  course  of  the  disease  is  four  or  five  days;  it  may  be 
as  short  as  two  or  as  long  as  ten  days. 

Dumb  Rabies. 

"When  this  form  of  the  disease  is  typical,  it  comes  on  with  restless- 
ness, depression,  a  tendency  to  lick  objects,  and.  paralysis  of  the  muscles, 
which  close  the  jaws.  As  a  consequence  of  the  paralysis,  the  lower  jaw 
drops,  the  animal  is  unable  to  close  the  mouth,  the  tongue  hangs  out,  and 
an  abundance  of  saliva  escapes.  The  mucous  membrane  of  the  mouth  be- 
comes dry,  discolored,  and  covered  with  dust.  The  animal  remains  quiet, 
does  not  respond  to  provocations,  and  appears  to  understand  its  helpless- 
ness.    As  Bouley  has  said,  the  animal  cannot  bite  and  does  not  desire  to  bite. 

"When  dumb  rabies  follows  a  period  in  which  the  animal  has  been 
affected  with  the  furious  form,  the  desire  and  tendency  to  bite  may  be" 
retaine  deven  after  the  jaw  is  paralyzed. 

"The  course  of  the  disease  is  short,  death  usually  occurring  in  from 
two  to  four  days. 

"The  dumb  form  of  rabies  is  very  common,  and  many  persons  know 
it  as  'drop  jaw'  who  have  no  idea  of  its  true  nature. 

"Many  of  the  common  mistakes  with  reference  to  rabies  arise  from 
an  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  symptoms.  It  is  on  this  point  that  there 
is  greatest  need  of  educational  work.  Bouley  has  most  earnestly  warned 
us  to  'distrust. a  dog  when  it  shows  signs  of  illness;  every  sick  dog  should 
as  a  rule  be  suspected;  more  particularly  distrust  a  dog  when  it  be- 
comes dull,  morose  and  seeks  for  solitude,  which  appears  not  to  know 
where  to  rest,  which  is  always  on  the  move,  prowling,  snapping  at  the 
air,  and  suddenly  barking  at  nothing  when  all  around  is  perfectly  still, 
whose  countenance  is  somber,  and  only  assumes  its  usual  animated  ex- 
pression by  brief  starts;  beware  of  the  dog  that  seeks  and  scrapes  inces- 
santly, and  exhibits  aggressive  movements  against  phantoms;  and,  finally, 
beware,  above  all,  of  the  dog  which  has  become  too  fond  of  you,  and  is 
continually  endeavoring  to  lick  the  hands  or  face." 

The  Period  of  Incubation  of  Rabies. 

The  period  of  incubation  of  a  contagious  disease  is  the  time  which 
elapses  between  the  inoculation  or  exposure  and  the  appearance  of  the  first 
symptoms.  With  rabies  this  period  varies  remarkably.  It  may  be  as  short 
as  six  or  seven  days,  and  it  occasionally  exceeds  one  hundred  days.  In 
rare  cases  it  has  been  reported  on  good  authority  that  a  year,  or  even 
fourteen  months,  elapsed  between  the  time  the  animal  was  bitten  and  the 
time  when  the  disease  manifested  itself.  The  majority  of  cases  develop 
in  from  three  to  seven  weeks. 

During  the  greater  part  of  the  period  of  incubation  the  infected  animal 
is  healthy,  and  would  not  cause  disease  in  any  animal  or  person  which  it 
bites.  The  saliva  may  become  virulent,  however,  two  or  three  days  before 
the  appearance  of  the  first  symptoms,  and  any  animal  or  person  bitten  after 
the  contagion  has  contaminated  the  saliva  is,  of  course,  liable  to  contract 
the  disease. 

There  is  a  very  erroneous  and  rather  stupid  belief,  quite  common,  to 
the  effect  that  if  a  dog  bites  a  person  and  becomes  mad  at  any  time 
thereafter  the  person  so  bitten  will  contract  hydrophobia.  This  fallacy 
may  have  arisen   from  some  Instance  In  which  a  person  had   been  bitten 


HYDROPHOBIA  201 

within  a  few  days  of  the  appearance  of  the  symptoms  of  disease  in  the 
dog,  and  when  the  saliva  was  already  virulent.  However  this  may  be, 
it  is  perfectly  certain  that  a  dog  can  not  convey  this  disease  when  he 
does  not  have  it  or  before  he  has  himself  contracted  it.  If,  therefore,  a 
dog  does  not  show  symptoms  of  rabies  within  a  week  from  the  time  the 
bite  is  inflicted  there  is  no  danger  of  the  person  contracting  the  disease. 
The  only  possibility  of  an  exception  to  this  rule  is  the  very  doubtful  one, 
that  in  extremely  rare  instances  a  dog  may  have  rabies  and  recover  from 
it  without  showing  characteristic  symptoms.  A  very  few  cases  of  this 
kind  have  been  observed  among  dogs  artificially  inoculated,  but  it  has 
not  yet  been  shown  that  their  saliva  became  virulent,  or  that  similar  cases 
occur  under  natural  conditions.  The  fact  remains,  however,  that  a  person 
is  in  no  danger  of  contracting  rabies  because  a  healthy  dog  has  bitten  him, 
which   dog   is   afterward   inoculated    with   rabies." 

The  following — that  I  found  in  some  paper,  is  too  good  to  leave  out 
of  this  book: 

"It  is  a  pleasure  to  note  that  Superintendent  Frael  of  the  New  York 
Department  of  Health  comes  out  flat-footed  regarding  the  extreme  rarity 
of  rabies,  asserting  that  what  people  suffer  from  is  false  or  pseudo  rabies 
brought  about  by  scare.  He  draws  attention  to  the  fact  that  during  the 
life  of  the  New  York  Society  for  Prevention  of  Cruelty  to  Animals,  which 
was  started  in  1894,  no  less  than  three  millions  of  dogs  and  cats  have  been 
handled.  That  the  employes  engaged  in  the  work  of  collecting  the  strays 
number  about  thirty,  and  on  an  average  everyone  of  them  is  bitten  four 
times  every  month,  or  fifty  times  a  year,  and  that  some  of  the  dogs'  were 
subsequently  declared  by  the  local  authorities  to  be  rabid.  On  this  basis 
of  computation  there  has  been  thirty  thousand  bites  by  all  sorts  of  ani- 
mals and  one  hundred  and  fifty  different  men  have  been  employed  during 
the  twenty  years,  yet  not  a  single  case  of  hydrophobia  has  resulted,  all  that 
the  men   did  being   to  cleanse  the  wound  thoroughly  and  have  it  dresseu. 

Of  course,  we  clog  people,  those  of  us  who  have  had  the  greatest  ex- 
perience Avith  dogs,  have  always  held  similar  views,  and  your  correspon- 
dent's very  simple  remedy  has  for  years  been  to  turn  the  water  faucet  on 
the  wound,  so  as  to  thoroughly  cleanse  it,  and  while  this  is  being  done, 
get  someone  to  take  bicarbonate  of  soda,  always  to  be  found  in  every  house- 
hold, or  if  not,  then  common  baking  powder,  and  make  a  creamy  paste, 
which  spread  on  a  clean  piece  of  linen  and  put  that  on  the  wound  and  then, 
bind  it.  After  a  while  the  emulsion  will  dry,  but  pour  a  little  water  on 
the  binding,  so  as  to  soak  to  the  dressing,  and  that  will  do.  You  will 
have  no  feeling  of  anything  wrong  and  there  is  little  question  that  it  is 
this   feeling   of   something   wrong   that  causes  this   pseudo-hydrophobia. 

Dog  men  cannot  be  too  emphatic  in  telling  people  not  to  be  afraid 
of  a  dog  bite,  and  if  the  United  States  would  only  pass  a  law  to  hang, 
draw  and  quarter  every  managing  editor  of  a  paper  that  published  a  mad 
dog  story,  every  doctor  who  told  a  patient  or  suggested  to  a  patient  the 
possibility  of  hydrophobia  and  towed  the  Pasteur  institutes  out  to  the 
middle  of  the  Atlantic  and  sunk  them  with  all  hands,  that  would  end 
rabies  and  the  hydrophobia  scare." 

And  now  read  this:  ' 

"The  late  Dr.  Michel  Peter,  the  greatest  clinical  expert  of  France, 
said:  'Pasteur  does  not  prevent  hydrophobia;  he  gives  it.'  This  opinion 
was  indorsed  by  such  scientific  leaders  as  Dr.  T.  M.  Dalon,  F.  R.  C.  S.,  Sir 
Benjamin  Ward  Richardson,  Dr.  Charles  Bell-Taylor,  Surgeon-General 
Charles  Gordon,  of  England,  and  Professor  VonFrisch,  of  Vienna.  The 
celebrated  Dr.  A.  Lutaud,  editor-in-chief  of  the  'Jouranl  de  Medecine  de 
Paris,'  said  in  that  journal  on  September  16,  1899,  referring  to  the  savants 
at  the  Pasteur  Institute:  'They  have  not  diminished  the  mortality;  they 
have  augmented  it,  in  creating  the  'madness  of  laboratories,'  very  often 
fatal,   with   which   they   have   inoculated   a   great   number   of  individuals.'  " 


202  HYDROPHOBIA 

THE  LAST  GREAT  CASE  OF  HYDROPHOBIA. 

The  man  who  wrote  the  following,  that  I  found  in  a  magazine  called 
"Everything,"  and  I  wish  I  knew  the  author's  name,  so  as  to  credit  him 
properly,  (and  also  to  shake  his  hand,  has  a  great  brain,  and  full  of  com- 
mon sense),  so  here's  the  article,  well  worth  reading: 

"For  one  time  in  six  thousand  years  as  far  as  history  records  one 
man  suffered  death  from  hydrophobia  caused  by  a  dog  licking  his  hand. 
That  is  the  story  sent  out  and  that  is  the  story  that  has  caused  the  world 
to  talk  and  inspired  newspapers  to  write  terrible  head  lines  about  what  to 
expect  next.  We  do  not  believe  that  any  man  ever  died  from  hydrophobia 
caused  by  a  dog  licking  his  hand.  In  truth,  outside  of  those  who  make 
their  money  in  that  way  there  is  grave  doubt  as  to  whether  there  is  any 
such  thing  as  hydrophobia  outside  the  patient's  mind.  If  a  man  can  be 
hypnotized  by  another  man  and  made  to  think  that  he  is  a  dog;  and  bark 
and  howl;  or  be  made  to  think  he  is  a  millionaire  or  a  dancing  master,  as 
people  have  been  hypnotized,  then  a  man  can  hypnotize  himself,  if  he  has 
the  power  of  hypnotism,  and  it  is  not  a  far  cry  to  believe  that  a  man  who 
has  been  bitten  or  a  man  who  never  saw  a  dog  can  hypnotize  himself  and 
make  believe  that  he  has  rabies,  so-called  and  so  defined;  and  die  in  the 
throes  of  agony. 

In  a  recent  number  of  Dumb  Animals,  that  sterling  paper  published 
by  George  T.  Angel,  a  writer  in  some  other  newspaper  was  copied.  His 
name  was  J.  M.  Greene,  and  his  article  was  addressed  to  The  Editor  of  the 
Tribune  and  is  worth  reading.  We  do  not  know  anything  about  the  Pasteur 
Institute  he  describes,  but  we  do  know  that  hydrophobia  is  essentially  ex- 
aggerated.     Mr.    Greene    said: 

"Much  has  been  written  lately  in  the  press  regarding  the  great  dan- 
ger from  the  prevalence  of  'hydrophobia'  in  New  York  city  and  elsewhere, 
and  much  more  of  the  same  terror  will  doubtless  be  written  before  the 
season  is  far  advanced.  Will  you  allow  me  a  brief  space  for  a  few  ideas 
on  this  subject? 

"In  the  first  place,  if  there  be  any  one  point  absolutely  certain  and 
established,  it  is  that  the  danger  of  getting  the  above  disease  has  been 
greatly  exaggerted,  and  that  the  great  majority  of  alleged  cases,  of  not 
only  'hydrophobia'  in  man,  but  also  'rabies'  in  the  dog,  have  been  cases  of 
some  other  disease.  It  is  also  easy  to  see  whence  comes  the  influence 
causing  this  dread  and  delusion.  The  year  following  the  opening  of  the 
first  'Pasteur  Institute'  in  Paris,  in  1885,  the  number  of  'hydrophobia'  pa- 
tients treated  in  that  city  leaped  to  three  thousand;  previous  to  that,  Paris 
could  boast  of  only  about  thirty  'cases'  a  year!  True  'hydrophobia'  is  a 
disease  so  rare  that  it  is  not  considered  worth  mentioning  in  mortality  re- 
ports. Well  known  medical  investigators  who  have  been  searching  for 
many  years  for  authentic  cases  have  failed  to  find  one.  Such  are  Dr. 
Lutaud,  of  Paris;  Dr.  Bell-Taylor,  of  England;  Dr.  Charles  W.  Dulles,  of 
Philadelphia;  Dr.  E.  C.  Spitzke,  of  New  York;  Professor  J.  W.  Hearn, 
of  Philadelphia;  Dr.  Hiram  Corson  and  Dr.  Thomas  Mayo.  It  is  a  notor- 
ious fact  that,  all  over  the  world,  societies  and  institutes  that  have  the 
handling  of  thousands  of  vicious  dogs,  frequently  biting  their  keepers, 
never  hear  of  the  disease. 

"But  spurious  cases,  caused  by  nervous  dread,  are  common.  As  in 
the  case  of  Mme.  Chevalier,  of  Paris,  instances  have  occurred  from  'sug- 
gestion' alone,  where  the  patient  has  not  been  bitten  at  all!  Such  cases,  it  is 
no  injustice  to  say,  are  the  product  of  the  morbid  fear  disseminated  and 
fostered  by  'Pasteur  Institutes.'  These  concerns  do  a  great  business 
throughout  the  world.  But  on  what  basis?  I  have  before  me  a  record, 
carefully  revised  from  year  to  year,  which  shows  that  up  to  January 
1st  of  the  present  year  1,857  deaths  from  'hydrophobia'  have  occurred 
among  patients  who  have  undergone  the  'Pasteur  treatment'  according 
to  directions,  in  many  of  which  cases  the  animals  which  did  the  biting 
remained  alive  and  well!  In  this  record  names,  dates,  and  other  particu- 
lars are  given. 


HYDROPHOBIA  203 

"The  'Pasteur  method'  depends  for  its  commercial  success  on  the 
most  colossal  pretensions  and  distortion  of  facts  and  figures.  Among  its 
'patients'  are  numbered  those  bitten  by  'rabid'  dogs  and  those  bitten  by 
animals  only  'suspected!'.  Again,  dogs  are  often  'found'  to  have  been 
rabid  by  postmortem  examination  and  by  inoculating  other  animals  with 
portions  of  their  brain  or  spinal  cord,  both  of  which  methods  are  denounced 
as  inconclusive  by  leading  scientists,  such  as  Dr.  Colin,  of  Alfort,  and  Pro- 
fessor Fleming,  of  England.  Many  substances,  such  as  common  soap, 
when  inoculated  into  animals,  produce  meningitis,  the  symptoms  of  which 
are  almost  identical  with  those  of  rabies;  Surgeon-General  Sternberg  has 
even  produced  these  symptoms  in  rabbits  with  his  own  saliva!  Moreover, 
it  is  well  known  that,  with  no  treatment  whatever,  from  90  to  9  5  per  cent 
of  those  bitten  by  actually  'rabid'  dogs  recover.  All  these  facts  tend  to 
show  that  the  statistics  of  the  'Pasteur  Institutes'  are  absolutely  farcical, 
and  as  a  consequence  they  are  ridiculed  by  every  leading  scientific  author- 
ity who  has  carefully  investigated,  and  who  charge  them  with  actually 
causing  'hydrophobia'  in  many  patients  by  their  inoculations  with  diseased 
animal  matter.  This  pernicious  and  most  dangerous  principle  of  deliber- 
ately introducing  into  the  life-current  septic  matter  from  'rabid'  animals, 
has  without  doubt  been  the  cause  of  numerous  cases  of  'paralytic  rabies' 
or  'laboratory  rabies'  in  patients.  The  late  Dr.  Michel  Peter,  the  greatest 
clinical  expert  in  France,  said:  'Pasteur  does  not  prevent  hydrophobia; 
he  gives  it.'  This  opinion  was  indorsed  by  such  scientific  leaders  as  Dr. 
T.  M.  Dalon,  F.  R.  C.  S.,  Sir  Benjamin  Ward  Richardson,  Dr.  Charles 
Bell-Taylor,  Surgeon-General  Charles  Gordon,  of  England,  and  Professor 
Von  Frish,  of  Vienna.  The  celebrated  Dr.  A.  Lutaud,  editor-in-chief  of  the 
'Journal  de  Medecine  de  Paris,'  said  in  that  journal  on  September  16, 
1899,  referring  to  the  savants  at  the  Pasteur  Institute:  "They  have  not 
diminished  the  mortality;  they  have  augmented  it,  in  causing  the  'mad- 
ness of  laboratories,'  very  often  fatal  with  which  they  have  inoculated  a 
great  number  of  individuals.' 

"As  the  clanger  of  'hydrophobia'  in  man  has  been  viciously  exag- 
gerated, so  has  been  that  of  'rabies'  in  the  dog.  It  is  safe  to  say  that  at 
least  99  out  of  every  100  alleged  cases  are  cases  of  ill  treatment,  heat 
prostration,  fits,  thirst,  stomach  trouble,  epilepsy,  or  similar  affections. 
A  dog  with  true  'rabies'  does  not  froth  at  the  mouth;  neither  does  he  go 
out  of  his  way  to  attack,  but  gives  every  indication  of  wishing  to  be  let 
alone.  These  facts,  however,  have  no  weight  with  some  people,  whose 
arrogance  and  bigotry  regarding  our  relation  to  the  'lower  animals'  pass 
comprehension.  One  swears  the  life  of  one  child  is  'worth  all  the  dogs  in 
the  world;'  another  would  have  all  the  clogs  in  the  state  muzzled  on  ac- 
count of  one  case  of  alleged  'rabies.'  Man  spends  his  life  in  abusing  and 
slaughtering  his  fellow-creatures;  but,  for-sooth,  if  some  unfortunate  mem- 
ber of  that  species  most  faithful  to  man,  wild  with  ill  treatment,  or  the 
disease  above  mentioned,  rushes  he  knows  not  whither,  beset  by  imagin- 
ary foes,  then  Man  joyfully  seizes  the  opportunity  to  attack  the  sufferer 
with  every  convenient  weapon,  as  in  former  days,  under  like  conditions, 
he  treated  his  fellow-man!  And  then,  if  bitten  by  his  victim,  he  resorts 
to  an  'institute,'  founded  on  and  perpetuating  the  horrible  sufferings  of 
artificially  maddened  creatures  (a  supply  of  which,  in  a  state  of  madness 
is  constantly  kept  on  hand,  whether  'used'  or  not),  whose  poisoned  tissues 
he  absorbs  into  his  circulation  as  an  antidote.  Is  not  this  a  specacle  for 
Gods  and  men?" 

There  is  no  doubt  in  this  world  but  what  two-thirds  of  the  Na- 
tional Belly-aching  is  the  direct  result  of  imagination.  There  is  no  doubt 
but  what  if  a  man  can  hypnotize  another  man,  if  he  has  the  power  he 
can  and  does  hypnotize  himself,  and  if  this  be  true,  and  it  is  an  accepted 
truth,  then  all  some  nerve-wracked  fellow  has  to  do  who  insists  that  some- 
thing is  the  matter  with  him,  is  to  imagine  that  a  clog  bit  him  and  then 
keep  following  up  the  idea  and  finally  die  like  a  dog  might  die  with 
rabies.      That   is    the    long    and    the    short   of    the   matter    in    this    world 


204  r   I  I  i  HYDROPHOBIA 

where  Wall-Eyed  Science  is  on  the  make  and  whe«re  men  must  earn  their 
bread. 

The  man  who  owns  pets  and  loves  his  pets  is  a  bigger  man  and  a 
better  man  than  the  narrow  souled  and  incomprehensible  creature  who 
is  too  stingy  to  feed  them  or  too  mean  to  want  to  give  them  a  place  after 
God  Almighty  formed  and  fashioned  them  and  sent  them  here  for  some 
good    purpose. 

Hydrophobia  is  a  dream — a  self  hypnotic  state  aided  and  abated  by 
those  who  want  to  cash   the  coin.      That's  all. 

I  hope  my  readers  have  read  all  of  the  many  pages  devoted  to  hydro- 
phobia, (and  these  pages  could  have  been  put  in  this  book-as  advertise- 
ments at  $35.00  per  page  just  as  well,)  as  there  was  no  trouble  in  getting 
the  ads — but  this  book  was  written  to  do  good  to  dogs — and  their  owners — 
much  in  preference  to  the  profits  in  coin — because  it  is — has  been — and 
will  be  my  highest  aim  in  life,  to  do  good  to  dogs — the  best,  truest,  and 
faithful  friend  we  have — four  legs  instead  of  two. 