

Administering  Medicine. — It  is  foolish  to  force  medicine  down  a  dog's 
throat  if  he  can  be  "tricked"  into  taking  it  naturally,  without  even  being 
aware  that  he  is  doing  so.  Even  when  force  is  necessary  there  is  no  need 
for  opening  a  dog's  teeth  when  liquid  is  to  be  given,  for  if  poured  into  the 
patient's  cheek  it  will  drain  through  the  teeth.  When  a  dog  refuses  to  swal- 
low whatever  is  placed  in  his  mouth — as  he  is  liable  to  do — all  that  is  neces- 
sary is  to  hold  his  head  up  and  close  his  nostrils  and  jaws  for  a  couple  of 
seconds. 

Giving  pills  to  some  dogs  is  a  more  difficult  matter.  Hold  the  dog's 
head  well  up,  open  mouth  with  your  left  hand,  and  place  the  pill  well  down 
his  throat  on  the  base  of  the  tongue,  quickly  close  his  jaws  for  a  second 
and  slightly  chuck  your  hand  or  finger  agaist  his  throat  and  he  is  bound 
to  make  a  gulp  and  swallow  it.  Some  dogs  are  very  cute  and  will  keep  the 
pill  inside  or  on  one  side  and  when  you  are  not  looking  will  quickly  spit 
it  out,  so  watch  them  for  a  minute  or  so  to  be  sure  the  pill  has  gone  down. 
Pills  can  also  be  given  hid  in  a  piece  of  meat  (providing  the  dog  is  not  so 
sick  that  he  has  refused  food),  but  if  you  give  them  pills  this  way,  fool 
the  dog  by  giving  him  first  a  few  pieces  of  meat  one  at  a  time,  having  your 
prepared  piece  handy  when  he  will  not  suspect  and  will  take  it,  following 
it  up  with  a  few  more  pieces  of  meat. 

A  great  many  dogs  will  take — when  not  too  sick — castor  oil,  cod  liver 
oil,  syrup  of  phosphates,  and  many  powders  even,  in  a  little  savory  broth  or 
porridge.  When  powders  are  refused  in  food,  mix  them  in  a  little  butter, 
honey  or  syrup,  and  place  well  back  on  the  tongue.  With  large  and  pow- 
erful dogs  the  mouth  can  be  held  open  by  twisting  a  towel  around  the 
upper  jaw,  and  an  assistant  is  generally  necessary  except  with  small  toy 
dogs,  which  can  be  held  tightly  between  the  knees  while  giving  the  med- 
icine. As  soon  as  the  medicine  is  placed  on  the  tongue,  close  the  mouth 
and  hold  it  shut  till  dog  is  seen  to  swallow,  but  must  not  be  held  so  as  to 
interfere  with  his  breathing  through  the  nostrils.  The  best  way  to  give 
liquid  medicine  is  to  gently  raise  the  dog's  head  and  form  a  pouch  or  pocket 
by  drawing  outwards  -and  slightly  upwards  the  lower  lip  at  the  corner  of 
the  mouth,  and  gradually  pouring  into  the  funnel  thus  formed. 

Gelatine  capsuls  are  very  handy  in  administering  powders.  If  the 
dose  is  bulky  it  is  better  to  divide  it  up  among  several  small  capsules  than 
it  is  to  try  to  inclose  it  in  a  single  large  one.  Powders  are  also  adminis- 
tered by  mixing  with  butter,  syrup  or  glycerine. 

Injections. — Use  a  rubber  syringe,  never  a  glass  one,  as  they  are  dan- 
gerous.    A  bulb  syringe  with  a  flexible  tube  two  or  three  inches  long  I  find 



the  best,  as  you  can  so  handily  hold  the  bulb  in  your  hand  and  work  it 
quickly  when  ready  before  the  dog  can  get  out  of  position.  The  regular 
fountain  syringe  is  also  very  good.  For  injection  in  the  ear  there  is  a 
regular  ear  syringe  made. 


"There  is  nothing  analogous  between  the  dog  and  the  horse.  The  vet- 
erinarian who  treats  a  dog  from  an  equine  standpoint  is  a  failure.  In  tem- 
perament and  nervous  organization  the  dog  resembles  man,  but  his  diges- 
tive organs  differ  so  radically  taht  medicine  does  not  act  on  each  alike.  As 
an  instance,  common  salt  has  no  particular  effect  upon  man.  On  the  dog, 
in  small  doses,  it  is  an  emetic;  in  large  doses,  a  poison.  Castor  oil  is  a 
mild  laxative  on  man;  on  the  dog  it  is  an  active  purge.  Epsom  salts  act 
only  mildly  on  man;  on  dogs  it  acts  violently,  producing  copious,  watery 
stools.  Aloes  and  rhubarb,  recognized  as  purgatives  on  man,  have  no 
particular  effect  o  ndogs,  and  so  with  numerous  other  drugs. 

"The  dog  is  particularly  susceptible  to  the  action  of  chloroform.  This 
is  on  account  of  the  irregular  heart  action  previously  mentioned.  His 
sensitive  nervous  system  responds  quickly  to  the  smallest  doses  of  strych- 
nine, and  a  minute  quanty  of  mercury  produces  profuse  salivation.  These 
drugs  should  only  be  administered  by  an  expert.  Opium  is  not  particu- 
larly dangerous  in  its  action  on  dogs. 

"Between  human  exclamations,  canine  howling,  coughing  and  gasping 
and  occasionally  biting,  the  dog  generally  escapes  without  the  medicine. 
Kindness  and  strategy  are  the  only  safe  methods  for  giving  medicine.  Aim 
to  get  the  dog  to  take  his  medicine  without  knowing  that  he  is  getting  it. 
This  can  be  accomplished  by  having  the  medicine  in  pill  form.  One  of 
the  pills  can  be  introduced  into  a  slit  made  in  a  small  cube  of  meat.  Disarm 
the  patient  of  suspicion  by  preparing  several  similar  cubes  of  meat  without 
the  pills.  Give  him  one  of  these.  He  may  examine  it,  but  finding  it  all 
right,  will  swallow  it.  Another  should  be  given  him.  If  he  swallows  it 
without  examination,  give  him  the  cube  containing  the  pill  and  it  will 
follow  its  predecessor.  Do  not  use  fluids  if  it  is  possible  to  avoid  them. 
Gelatine  capsuls  can  be  had  in  various  sizes  to  accommodate  all  drugs. 
It  is  better  to  give  two  small  capsules  than  one  large  one.  To  give  a 
capsule  have  an  attendant  take  a  small  dog  in  his  lap;  a  large  dog  should 
be  gently  backed  into  a  corner.  Stroke  the  dog's  head  and  face  gently; 
then  with  the  left  hand  held  over  the  head  just  in  front  of  the  eyes,  press 
the  lips  against  the  teeth  just  enough  to  cause  him  to  open  his  mouth. 
Moisten  the  capsule,  place  it  as  far  back  on  the  tongue  as  possible,  which 
can  be  inserted  well  down  the  throat  without  danger  to  either  the  dog  or 
the  physician.  Close  the  mouth  quickly  and  the  capsule  will  be  swallowed." 
The  following  was  published  in  the  Dog  Fancier,  written  by  their 
veterinarian,  Dr.  D.  H.  Hall,  and  is  worth  publishing,  containing  many  good 
ideas: 



"In  the  treatment  of  dogs  or  other  domestic  animals  one  great  obstacle 
to  successful  medication  is  the  difficulty  often  encountered  in  the  adminis- 
tration of  remedies. 

Dogs  frequently  refuse  to  swallow  liquids  or  offer  such  strenuous  ob- 
jections that  a  portion  of  the  medicine  is  spilled  and  the  quantity  admin- 
istered becomes  merely  speculative.  Hence  it  is  not  advisable  to  use  liquid 
medicines  at  all  for  dogs  if  it  can  be  avoided. 

Hypodermic  injections  of  alkaloidal  "solutions  are  the  most  prompt,  effi- 
cient and  reliable  method  of  administration  we  have,  but  as  it  pre-supposes 
the  possession  of  a  hypodermic  syringe  the  plan  is  not  feasible  in  the  ma- 
jority of  instances. 

Other  methods  are  to  have  the  remedies  incorporated  in  tablet  or 
granule  form  or  given  in  gelatin  capsules.  For  ordinary  purposes  this  is 
the  most  convenient  method.  The  tablet  or  capsule  can  be  placed  toward 
the  back  of  the  tongue  and  readily  forced  back  with  the  finger  far  enough 
so  that  to  swallow  is  the  only  thing  the  patient  can  do. 

Always  treat  him  kindly  and  give  an  approbative  pat  on  the  head 
and  when  the  time  for  the  next  dose  arrives  he  will  be  ready  for  it. 

At  times  liquid  medicines  are  necessary,  especially  saline  laxatives,  and 
as  they  are  decidedly  of  unpleasant  taste  and  the  dose  necessarily  large  it 
is  frequently  quite  a  difficult  matter  to  convince  the  patient  that  it  is  "not 
bad  to  take."  Rochelle  salts  is  the  least  nauseating  of  the  saline  laxatives 
and  when  given  largely  diluted  with  water  its  action  is  increased  and  the 
taste  not  so   disagreeable. 

In  giving  liquids  place  the  patient  in  a  corner,  but  do  not  handle  rough- 
ly. Have  the  medicine  in  a  bottle  or  hard  rubber  syringe.  Take  hold  of 
the  fold  at  the  angle  of  the  mouth  and  pull  out  to  form  a  pouch,  then  pour 
in  a  small  quantity  at  a  time,  repeating  as  it  is  swallowed. 

A  dose  of  castor  oil  is  sometimes  required,  especially  to  supplement 
the  action  of  a  vermicide.  If  this  is  given  in  about  four  parts  of  milk 
the  taste  will  be  largely  disguised  and  the  administration  more  pleasantly 
effected. 

In  applying  lotions  to  the  eye  the  lids  can  be  separated  by  the  thumb 
and   finger  and   the   solution   dropped   in   from   a   medicine   dropper. 

When  the  nasal  passages  are  occluded  by  adherent  discharges,  appli- 
cations of  warm  water  and  steaming  will  be  of  benefit.  For  the  latter,  the 
patient  can  be  held  with  the  nose  over  a  vessel  containing  hot  water  (med- 
icated if  the  case  demands)  and  enclosing  head  and  vessel  with  a  towel. 
Care  must  be  taken  though  to  allow  sufficient  air. 

In  applying  remedies  to  the  ear  the  most  useful  implement  is  a  blunt, 
hard  rubber  syringe.  If,  however,  it  is  necessary  to  apply  dry  powder  a 
"blower"  will  be  found  of  great  service. 

In  treating  wounds  the  watchword  should  be  antisepsis,  but  in  the 
use  of  such  preparations  one  must  always  bear  in  mind  the  danger  that 
may  result  from  the  patient  licking  the  dressing.  Of  antiseptics  iodoform 
should   never   be   used    for   the   dog   except   in    minute   quantities,    owing   to 
liability  of  absorption  and  poisoning.  In  applying  remedies  other  than 
per  orem  it  sometimes  becomes  necessary  to  restrain  the  patient  from  biting 
his  would-be  benefactor.  This  can  be  accomplished  by  tying  a  long  piece 
of  tape  tightly  around  the  paws,  having  the  knot  on  the  under  side.  Then 
carry  the  ends  back  of  the  ears  and  tie  again. 

In  the  application  of  unguents  to  the  skin  of  long-haired  dogs  time 
is  really  sometimes  saved  by  clipping.  The  skin  can  be  more  thoroughly 
cleansed  and  dried  and  the  remedy  more  evenly  applied  and  consequently 
better  results  obtained. 

In  the  writer's  experience,  no  appreciable  difference  could  ever  be 
observed  in  the  texture  or  color  of  the  hair  when  it  had  grown  out  again. 
The  clipping,  however,  should  not  be  resorted  to  except  in  obstinate  cases 
and  during  favorable  weather. 

Rectal  injections  are  frequently  indicated,  especially  in  house  dogs 
where  from  lack  of  exercise  and  irregular  habits  the  faeces  becomes  im- 
pacted. In  cases  of  collapse,  extreme  weakness  and  refusal  of  food  it 
sometimes  becomes  necessary  to  introduce  predigested  foods  and  medi- 
cines per  rectum.  The  ordinary  bulb  syringe  or  those  of  the  hard  rubber 
variety  can  be  used  for  this  purpose,  but  the  nozzle  must  not  be  pointed 
enough  to  injure  the  mucus  membrane  as  abrasions  of  the  latter  might 
prove  troublesome. 

In  connection  with  the  administration  of  medicine,  it  will  be  well  to 
remember  that  all  drugs  act  more  powerfully  on  an  empty  stomach  than 
when  it  holds  food,  either  liquid  or  solid.  Therefore,  powerful  remedies  and 
those  which  are  of  irritating  character,  such,  as  arsenic,  iron,  nux  vomica 
and  cod-liver  oil,  should  be  given  after  feeding,  so  that  they  will  mingle 
"with  the  food  and  be  absorbed  slowly.  Oil  can  be  administered  easily  if 
floated  on  milk.  Whisky,  alcohol  and  all  fluids  of  strong  taste  should  be 
freely  diluted  with  water  before  administering,  at  least  four  parts  of  water 
to  one  of  whisky. 