


DRUGS 

Table  for  Mixing  Standard  Oil  of  Tar. 

%  Teaspoonful  Standard  Oil  of  Tar  in  Tumbler  of  Water  is  1  part  to 100. 


1  Teaspoonful  in  Pint  of  Water  is  1  to  100. 
%   Pint  to  6  Gallons  of  Water  is  1  to  100. 
1  Pint  to  12  Gallons  of  Water  is  1  to  100. 
It  will  be  easy  to  get  other  proportions  by  using  this  as  a  base. 

Acetic  Acid.— '-Used  in  making  Mindererous'  spirit,  which  enters  into 
fever  mixture,  distemper  mixture,  etc.;  also  as  a  cooling  lotion,  combined 
with  sal  ammoniac  and  spirit,  for  application  to  swellings  and  bruises,  to 
reduce  local  inflammation  where  the  skin  is  not  broken. 

Cooling  Lotion. — The  following  is  the  formula:  Take  sal  ammoniac  4 
ounces,  strong  acetic  acid  10  ounces,  boiling  water  10  ounces,  methylated 
spirit  2  ounces.  Powder  the  sal  ammoniac  and  dissolve  in  the  boiling  water 
and  acetic  acid,  and  add  the  spirit. 

Before  applying  the  lotion  it  must  be  mixed  with  eight  or  ten  parts  of 
cold  water,  and  the  part  kept  constantly  wetted  with  it  until  heat,  pain  and 
other  inflammatory  symptoms  have  disappeared.  N.  B. — An  intermittent 
use  of  such  lotions  by  causing  reaction  often  does  more  harm  than  good. 

Gallic  Acid — Astringent  and  Stypic. — Given  in  diabetes  and  for  in- 
ternal hemorrhage.  Dose,  three  to  eight  grains.  The  following  powders 
are  a  useful  form  in  which  to  administer  it. 

Styptic  Powders. — Take  gallic  acid  3  grains,  powdered  alum  4  grains, 
powdered  opium  %  grain,  to  make  one  powder.  One  to  be  given  twice  or 
thrice"  a  day. 

Aconite — The  common  name  of  this  plant  is  monk's-hood,  and  both 
the  leaves  and  root  are  used  in  medicine.  The  liniment  of  aconite  of  the 
British  Pharmacopoeia  often  proves  of  great  value  in  assuaging  the  pangs 
of  rheumatism,  and  the  tincture  added  to  the  distemper  mixture  is,  in  cases 
where  there  is  nervous  excitement,  of  great  value.  It  must  always  be 
given  with  great  caution.  The  dose  of  the  tincture  is  from  one-half  to  three 
drops,  according  to  age  and  size. 

j        Aio©e.»-Thi8  is  one  of  the  safest  and  best  purgatives  for  the  dog,  the 



dose  is  from  ten  grains  up  to  twenty  grains,  the  dog  requiring  a  propor- 
tionately much  larger  dose  of  this  drug  than  man;  it  is,  however,  always 
advisable  to  try  the  effects  of  the  smaller  dose  first,  as  the  lives  of  many 
dogs  are  sacrificed  to  a  rash  boldness  in  administering  overdoses.  Aloes 
are  generally  given  in  conjunction  with  other  purgatives,  as  jalap,  rhubarb, 
etc.,  and  they  enter  into  the  composition  of  most  aperient  pills  made  for 
the  dog.     The  following  is  a  useful  mild  aperient  bolus: 

Mild  Aperient  Bolus. — Take  aloes  socotrine,  iy2  drams;  powdered  jalap, 
2  scruples;  powdered  ginger,  1  scruple;  Castile  soap,  y%  dram;  make  into 
twelve  balls.     Dose,  one  or  two.     Or  for  small  dogs,  into  24  pills. 

Alum. — Astringent;  dose  four  to  eight  grains,  given  in  diabetes  and 
internal  hemmorrhage  (see  Acid,  gallic).  Alum  is  also  given  in  cases  of 
obstinate  diarrhea,  in  conjunction  with  opium,  and  it  may  be  advanta- 
geously given  in  such  cases  as  a  clyster,  dissolved  in  gruel.  Burnt  alum  is  a 
very  mild  caustic  applied  to  fungus  growths. 

Ammonia,  Aromatic  Spirits  of  (Spirit  of  Sal  Volatile). — A  diffusible 
stimulant  and  antacid.  It  is  useful  in  colic,  and  is  given  in  cases  of  de- 
pression of  the  vital  powers.  The  dose  is  from  ten  drops  to  a  teaspoonful. 
It  must  always  be  largely  diluted  before  it  is  given. 

Ammonia,  Muriate. — Sal  ammoniac.     For  uses  see  Acetic  acid. 

Ammonia,  Solution  gf  Acetate  of  (Mindererus'  Spirit). — Given  in  febrile 
and  inflammatory  disorders,  distemper,  pneumonia,  etc.  The  following  mix- 
ture for  distemper  which  may  be  given  in  any  case  where  feverishness  or 
inflammation  is  present: 

Distemper  Mixture. — Take  chlorate  of  potash  2  drams,  sweet  spirit  of 
nitre  2  drams,  Mindererus'  spirit  1  ounce,  tincture  of  henbane  2  drams,  wa- 
ter sufficient  to  make  4  ounces.  Dose,  from  one-half  to  three  teaspoonfuls 
three  or  four  times  a  day. 

Ammonia,  Strong  Liquid. — This  is  used  as  a  blister  to  the  dog  (see 
Blisters).  Diluted  with  three  parts  of  distilled  water,  it  forms  the  spirit 
of  hartshorn  of  the  shops,  which,  with  other  articles,  is  used  as  a  liniment 
for  sprains,  bruises,  rheumatism,  etc. 

Liniment  for  Sprains. — Equal  parts  of  spirit  of  hartshorn,  turpentine, 
rape  oil,  and  laudanum,  make  a  generally  useful  liniment  for  the  above 
purposes.     If  in  a  glass-stoppered  bottle  it  will  not  be  impaired  by  keeping. 

Antimonial  Powder  (True  James'  Powder). — This  is  given  as  a  febri- 
fuge and  diaphoretic  in  doses  of  from  four  to  six  grains;  it  is  preferred  to 
tartar  emetic,  as  not  being  so  likely  to  excite  the  dog's  stomach.  It  is  by 
some  relied  on  as  a  cure  for  distemper. 

Antimony,  Tartarated  (Tartar  Emetic). — This,  as  its  name  implies,  is 
an  emetic.  On  the  dog's  stomach  it  acts  very  quickly;  but,  indeed,  vomiting 
appears  to  be  quite  a  natural  act  in  the  dog,  and  no  doubt  it  is  attended 
with  beneficial  results  when  he  is  his  own  doctor  and  applies  to  his  natural 
physic,  the  couch  or  dog  grass;  but  this  habit  in  the  dog  has  been  used  to 
his  injury,  and  the  use  of  emetics  shamefully  abused,  and  from  being  treat- 
ed as  a  panacea  for  all  dog  ills,  has  done  much  harm.  Emetics  are,  however, 
of  use,  and  it  is  not  bad  practice  to  give  one  on  the  first  appearance  of  dis- 
temper or  jaundice,  and  in  cases  of  poisoning  they  are  our  sheet  anchor. 
The  dose  of  tartar  emetic,  as  an  emetic,  is  from  one  to  three  grains  given 
dissolved  in  warm  water,  and  the  dog  freely  drenched  with  it.  It  is  also  used 
as  a  febrifuge  in  doses  of  one-eighth  of  a  grain  to  half  a  grain;  but  for 


this  purpose  the  James's  Powder,  another  preparation  of  antimony,  is  to  be 
preferred. 

Arnica,  Tincture  of. — This  is  applied  externally  as  a  stimulant  in 
sprains,  bruises  and  rheumatic  lameness  ,and  also  for  dispersing  tumors.  It 
should  be  used  as  a  lotion  diluted  with  from  ten  to  twenty  parts  of  cold 
water. 

Arsenic,  Fowler's  Solution  of. — This  is,  I  believe,  the  only  way  in 
which  arsenic  is  given  to  the  dog.  It  is  an  alterative,  and,  as  such,  is  of 
great  value  in  some  cases  of  mange  and  other  obstinate  skin  diseases.  The 
dose  is  from  two  to  eight  drops.  It  should  always  be  given  on  a  full  stom- 
ach, and  it  must  be  withheld  for  a  week  or  so  if  it  has  produced  redness  of 
the  eyes,  running  of  watery  fluid  from  the  nose,  and  a  loathing  of  food. 
I  generally  give  it  with  a  tonic  to  prevent  this  last  result.  Give  each  dose 
in  a  teaspoonful  of  tincture  of  gentian  or  Peruvian  bark,  immediately  after 
a  meal. 

Belladonna Deadly   nightshade.      This   is   a   narcotic   and   sedative   of 

very  powerful  action,  and,  like  aconite,  must  be  used  with  great  caution.  The 
tincture  is  the  most  useful  preparation  of  it.     Dose,  from  two  to  six  drops. 

Bonzoin,  Tincture  of  (Friar's  Balsam). — An  excellent  application  to 
cuts,  tears,  bites,  &c.  It  should  be  applied  as  soon  as  the  parts  are  cleaned 
from  dirt,  &c,  to  stop  bleeding  and  protect  the  exposed  surface.  The  tinc- 
ture is  also  given  in  chronic  coughs.     Dose,  ten  or  fifteen  drops  on  sugar. 

Bismuth — The  subnitrate  of  bismuth  has  a  soothing  effect  in. stomach 
disorders,  and  in  long-continued  diarrhea  is  often  most  beneficial.  Three 
to  ten  grains  of  it  may  in  such  cases  be  given  twice  a  day  in  chalk  mixture. 

Bromide  of  Potassium — This  is  very  useful  in  epileptic  fits  and  to  allay 
excitement.  It  may  be  given  in  doses  of  from  five  to  twenty  grains,  and 
where  a  dog  is  subject  to  fits,  continued  for  two  or  three  weeks.  It  has, 
however,   a   debilitating   effect. 

Buckthorn  (Syrup  of). — This  is  a  time-honored  purgative  for  the  dog, 
and  a  very  good  one,  although  it  has  got  into  disrepute,  as  I  believe, 
through  the  rubbish  that  is  too  commonly  sold  under  the  name;  or  since  it 
became  obsolete  as  a  medicine  for  man  druggists  have  been  less  careful  in  its 
preparation.  The  syrup  should  be  made  from  the  fresh  juice  of  the  berries 
of  buckthorn  (Rhamous  catharticus),  a  shrub  or  tree  which  grows  plenti- 
fully in  our  woods  and  hedges.  The  average  dose  is  one  tablespoonful,  and 
to  prevent  griping  a  teaspoonful  of  syrup  of  white  poppies  should  be  added. 

Calomel Acts    as    an     emetic  and    purgative;     it   is   at  all   times  an 

uncertain  and  unsafe  medicine  for  the  dog.  Youatt  and  others  say  it  should 
never  be  given  in  larger  doses  than  three  grains.  Country  farriers  and 
others  often  give  it  in  much  larger  doses — indeed,  by  the  rule  of  thumb — ■ 
and  the  consequence  is  the  death  or  utter  ruin  of  many  valuable  dogs.  As 
a  remedy  in  the  yellows  and  other  affections  of  the  liver,  podophyllin,  or 
"vegetable  calomel,"  is  safer  and  more  effective. 

Camphor — Calmative  and  antispasmodic.  May  be  given  in  cases 
of  excitement  and  restlessness,  and  also  in  severe  diarrhea.  The  dose  is 
from  two  to  eight  grains. 

Carren  Oil A  most  useful  application  to  scalds  or  burns.     It  is  made 

by  mixing  equal  parts  of  raw  linseed  oil  and  lime  water. 


Castor  Oil Purgative.     Dose,  from  a  teaspoonful  to  a  wineglassful. 

It  is  a  mistake  to  give  very  large  doses,  as  such  are  useless,  the  excess  being 
carried  off  by  the  bowels. 

Cayenne  Pepper — Stimulant  and  stomachic. 

Chalk,  prepared — Anticid  in  its  effects;  it  is  particularly  useful  in 
diarrhea,  for  which  it  may  be  given  alone  if  nothing  better  can  be  conven- 
iently had.     Dose,  as  much  as  will  lie  on  a  quarter. 

Chloral  Hydrate — Antispasmodic  and  soporific.  May  be  given  in  cases 
of  fits,  also  when  the  dog  suffers  great  pain.  Dose,  from  five  to  twenty 
grains,  according  to  size  of  dog,  and  the  result  it  is  desired  to  produce.  The 
larger  dose  would  induce  sleep. 

Chloroform. — Principally  used  as  an  anoesthetic  in  painful  operations. 
It  also  acts  as  an  anodyne  and  antispasmodic  in  colic,  etc.  As  such  it  is 
generally  given  in  the  form  of  chloric  ether,  the  dose  of  which  is  from  ten 
to  thirty  drops  in  water  or  other  fluid. 

Uhinchoiia,  or  Peruvian  Bark. — This  is  a  well  known  medicine,  and, 
as  a  tonic,  suits  the  dog  admirably.  It  is  especially  useful  after  distemper 
and  other  lowering  diseases,  and  works  wonders  in  getting  dogs  into  high- 
class  condition  for  shows  or  work.  The  following  preparation  of  the  bark 
is  most  convenient,  being  in  concentrated  form,  and  will  keep  good  for 
years: 

Concentrated  Bark  Tonic. — Take  concentrated  decoction  of  yellow  cin- 
chona bark,  compound  tincture  of  bark,  equal  parts;  dose,  one  to  two  tea- 
sponfuls  twice  daily  in  water,  as  a  drench. 

Cod  .Liver  Oil. — This  well  known  medicine  is  given  to  the  dog  in 
cases  of  debility  and  emaciation  supervening  inflammatory  attacks,  and  to 
arrest  the  progress  of  chronic  diseases  of  the  respiratory  organs.  It  is  also 
given  in  scrofulous  affections.  Excellent  for  ricketty  and  weakly  dogs; 
but  it  is  injurious  to  give  it  to  strong  growing  pups  of  the  larger  breeds,  as 
it  makes  fat,  and  the  pups  get  so  heavy  the  legs  often  give  way.  Dose, 
from  a  teaspoonful  to  a  tablespoonful.     Large  doses  are  a  mistake. 

Copper,  Sulphate  of  (Blue  Stone). — Externally  applied,  it  is  a  mild 
caustic;  internally  administered,  astringent  and  tonic;  dose  from  %  to  2 
grains,  but  is  apt  to  cause  vomiting.  In  applying  it  to  proud  flesh  in  sores, 
choose  a  crystal  with  a  smooth  surface,  which  wet  and  rub  on  the  part,  or 
scrape  a  little  into  fine  powder  and  dust  over  the  sore. 

Cream  of  Tartar — A  cooling  laxative  and  diuretic.  Dose,  ten  to 
twenty  grains,  given  daily. 

Dandelion. — Given  in  jaundice,  and  other  liver  affections.  The  extract 
is  the  most  convenient  form,  or  the  decoction  made  as  follows  may  be 
given:  Fresh  dandelion  roots,  sliced,  6  ounces;  water,  iy2  pints;  boil 
slowly  down  to  half  a  pint.     Dose,  half  a  wineglass. 

Digitalis — See  Foxglove. 

Idpsom  Salts — Purgative.  Dose,  one  to  three  drams.  A  convenient 
form  for  giving  this  salts  is  the  ordinary  black  draught  of  the  shops. 



Ergot  of  Kye Useful  in  cases  of  protracted  parturition.  Five  to  fifteen grains  may  be  given  in  a  little  warm  water  with  a  teaspoonful  of  brandy 
added.     The  dose  repeated  in  an  hour  if  needed. 

Ether,  Spirit  of  Nitrous  (Sweet  Spirit  of  Nitre). — Diaphoretic  and 
diuretic.     It  is  given  in  distemper,  fevers,  influenza,  etc.