

Distemper. — This  disease  trouble  breeders  more  and  causes  more  deaths 
than  anything  else,  except  perhaps  worm.  It  is  the  hardest  subject  I  have 
to  handle  in  this  book,  and  as  too  much  information  on  this  dreaded  dis- 
ease we  cannct  know,  I  have  secured  for  this  article  about  all  I  could  get. 
Read  and  study  up  this  subject  before  distemper  appears,  so  as  to  be  then 
prepared  to  attend  to  it  when  your  dogs  are  so' unfortunate  as  to  have  it. 
It  is  not  a  foregone  conclusion  that  a  dog  must  die,  because  he  has  dis- 
temper; I  have  had  many  dogs  get  it  and  get  well,  and  I  now  have  dogs 
in  my  kennel  that  got  safely  over  it,  and-  these  same  dogs  afterwards  ex- 
posed to  it  several-  times  and  did  not  again  have  it.  As  to  this,  I  believe 
that  it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  a  grown  dog  will  have  it  the  second 
time,  if  exposed,  any  more  than  a  man  is  in  danger  of  getting  smallpox 
after  having  passed  safely  through  it.  Lately  I  had  two  cases  of  distemper 
in  my  kennel,  one  being  a  boarder,  a  Cocker  spaniel,  and  the  other,  one 
of  my  own  poodles,  both  young  dogs  of  six  months.  Unfortunately  both 
cases  proved  fatal,  but  I  checked  it  up  here  and  not  another  one  of  the 
fifty  other  dogs  in  the  kennel  had  it  at  all,  which  was  indeed  lucky,  as  it 
was  impossible  to  prevent  most  of  them  from  exposure  at  the  first  stages 
of  the  disease  when  these  two  were  taken  down  with  it.  What  I  did  do, 
however,  was  to  immediately  take  steps  to  prevent,  especially  the  young- 
er dogs  from  getting  it.  This  I  did  by  at  once  isolating  the  ones  that  had 
It,  thoroughly  disinfecting  all  kennels,  destroying  the  bedding  that  had  been 
see  how  they  ate,  and  condition  of  passages,  and  am  glad  to  say  that  this 
time  I  confined  it  to  the  two  that  died. 

It  is  a  wise  plan  to  have  this  remedy  on  hand,  so  that  when  distemper 
used,  and  then  putting  every  dOg  that  had  been  exposed  on  either  Clayton's 
few  clays,  watching  every  dog  for  any  signs  of  distemper  coming,  also  as  to 
Distemperine,  which  has  been  my  standby  for  years.  This  I  kept  up  for  a 
comes,  you  can  go  to  work  on  the  dog  at  once,  and  not  make  it  worse  by 
having  to  wait  till  you  can  get  the  remedy.  Since  writing  my  first  book 
I  have  used  the  "Onion  Remedy"  of  my  friend,  William  Saxby,  the  Beagle 
breeder  of  Ilion,  N.  Y.  This,  in  addition  to  other  treatment,  and  with  good 
results,  as  it  can  do  no  harm  and  will  surely  do  good.  It  is  called  the 
"Home   Made  Distemper   Cure,"   and   was   published   in   all   the  dog   papers: 

Slice  a  sound  raw  onion  (the  stronger  the  better)  and  put  into  a 
stocking  leg  and  with  safety  pins  fasten  around  the  dog's  neck,  with  the 
onions  under  the  chin.  This  will  cause  the  discharge  to  be  watery;  renew 
often  enough  to  keep  it  watery  (say  every  other  day)  and  with  careful 
nursing  you  will  be  surprised  at  your  success. 

How  to  diet  a  clog  during  distemper  is  a  question  to  which  the  answer 
must  vary  according  to  the  circumstances  of  the  case.  It  goes  without 
say  ng,  however,  that  in  all  cases  srd'd  meat  must  be  tabooed — anything 
likely  to  raise  the  temperature  being  highly  unsuitable.  If  the  dog  is 
purged  violently,  milk,  with  a  small  percentage  of  l-'me  water  added,  would 
be  good,  as  would  also  port  wine  beaten  up  with  egg.  As  a  general  rule 
tbe  safest  plan  is  to  dispense  with  solids  altogether,  and  feed  on  gruels, 
broths,  beef  tea,  etc.,  remembering  that,  as  with  a  human  invalid  so  with  a 
canine,  it  is  equally  of  importance  to  p  ovide  only  light,  easily-digested 
nourishment,  since  the  stomach  is  affected  with  the  rest  of  the  body,  and 
what  it  could  easily  assimilate  during  health,  it  has  no  means  of  dealing 
with  during  sickness. 

Dog  biscuits  and  all  farinaceous  solids  are  to  be  avoided  now.     A  little 


gruel  made  with  fine  Oatmeal  and  boiling  milk  will  usually  be  taken,  espe- 
cially if  not  too  thick.  Again,  though  we  dispense  with  meat,  gravy  may 
be  offered  and  soup  made  by  boiling  bones.  As  the  animal  regains  his 
strength  meat  may  be  recommended,  by  slow  degrees,  but  it  should  be 
thoroughly  cooked,  and  it  might  also  be  minced  with  advantage,  as  the 
dog,  even   in  sickness,  is  prone  to  his  natural  habit  of   "bolting"   food. 

Another  excellent  food  we  have  found  for  invalid  dogs  is  the  family 
rice  pudding — rice  baked  with  milk.  A  dog  will  generally  accept  this  and 
it  forms  both  a  satisfying  and  nutritious  meal. 

Keeping  them  eating  is  the  great  trouble — and  eat  they  must,  in  order 
to  sustain  sufficient  strength  to  get  through  this  trying  ordeal.  When  the 
dog  quits  eating  and  refuses  food,  try  and  coax  him  to  eat  by  getting  and 
cooking  him  something  new  and  delicate  that  he  has  not  been  used  to 
getting  ordinarily.  I  have  often  gone  out  and  bought  a  quail,  or  some 
delicacy  like  this,  and  he  would  eat  it  when  he  had  refused  everything  else. 
Gravy  made  with  flour  in  it,  from  stewed  chicken  giblets,  they  will  often  eat. 
It  requires  patience  on  the  owner's  part  and  too  much  care  and  kind- 
ness can  hardly  be  exercised,  as  they  materially  help  and  encourage  the 
dog  to  pull  through.  Some  dogs  give  up  much  easier  than  others,  for  a 
dog  with  distemper  is  a  very  sick  dog,  and  here  is  where  you  can  do 
them  a  lot  of  good  in  keeping  up  their  courage  by  the  attention  you  bestow 
on  them.  The  after  results  of  distemper  are  numerous  and  much  to  be 
dreaded,  especially  in  cases  that  have  not  been  promptly  treated.  Chorea 
is  the  worst  of  all  and  so  frequently  follows  distemper. 

Now,  as  an  after  medicine  to  build  the  dog  up,  Eberhart's  Tonic  Pills 
will  work  wonders.  By  this  I  mean  after  your  dog  is  over  distemper, 
yet  weak  and  very  much  run  down.  I  invariably  keep  my  dogs  on  these 
pills  for  a  few  weeks  until  they  are  again  themselves,  and  look  and  act 
like  well  dogs. 

Distemper  is  not  necessarily  fatal  if  proper  care  and  treatment  is  given, 
and  when  I  have  discovered  it  in  my  kennels,  I  do  not  give  up  and  think 
they  will  die,  but  I  go  to  work  at  the  first  signs  and  try,  and  expect  to  save 
them.  The  careful  nursing  and  attention  is  highly  important,  and  as  to 
this,  every  authority  on  the  subject  will  agree.  The  dog  has  to  go  through 
a  regular  siege  and  cannot  be  cured  in  a  few  days  by  any  medicine,  and 
too  much  medicine  would  be  even  worse  than  none  at  all — here  is  where 
the  good  nursing  comes  in.  If  you  do  this  part  all  right  and  can  keep 
the  dog  eating  enough  of  the  proper  food  to  keep  its  strength  up,  and  the 
surroundings  and  care  are  all  properly  looked  after,  the  dog  need  not  die. 

There  is  another  important  point,  and  that  is  in  regard  to  a  dog's  bed- 
ding. The  more  frequently  this  can  be  .changed  during  sickness  the  better. 
When  I  have  taken  a  lot  of  dogs  to  a  bench  show,  my  own  and  others, 
especially  if  I  knew  they  had  never  had  distemper,  I  have  always  made 
it  a  rule  to  give  these  dogs  either  one  or  the  other  of  these  remedies  during 
the  show,  and  for  a  few  days  after,  as  a  safeguard  against  their  contracting 
distemper  at  the  show,  and  with  only  one  exception  in  many  years  of 
exhibiting,  I  have  never  lost  a  dog  from  its  being  at  a  show.  I  believe, 
if  this  was  made  a  practice  by  all  exhibitors  at  dog  shows,  that  we  would 
not  hear  of  so  many  cases  of  distemper  as  an  after-result  of  exhibiting. 

The  following  article  on  this  disease  was  written  by  Wm.  A.  Bruette, 
D.  V.  S.,  ("Dent."),  the  well-  known  veterinary  surgeon  of  Chicago.  It 
is  a  very  complete  and  comprehensive  treatise  on  the  subject  by  a  man 
who  has  had  experience  with  dogs  for  years,  and  who,  besides  being  a 
qualified  veterinarian,  is  also  a  gradute  in  human  practice  and  is  consid- 
ered  reliable  authority  by  many  dog  fanciers: 

"Distemper.  (By  Dent.)  Of  the  various  diseases  that  dogdom  is 
heir  to  distemper  is  the  one  particular  black  cloud  to  the  breeder,  as  its 
ravages  are  greater  among  the  finely  bred  dogs  kept  in  large  kennels,  or  as 
pets,  whose  systems  are  weakened  by  in-and-in  breeding,  or  the  highly 
artificial  life  they  are  forced  to  lead.  Dogs  of  low  degree  are  susceptible 
to  the  malady,  but  rarely  succumb.  The  common  cur  when  attacked  re- 
tires for  a  few  days  under  the  first  available  house  or  porch,  to  reappear 


perhaps  a  little  thinner  and  more  careworn,  but  with  his  usual  indepen- 
dence and   aggressiveness. 

"The  disease  has  been  compared  to  typhoid  fever  in  man,  but  I  can 
see  but  little  analogy  between  them.  Distemper  is  an  infantile  disorder; 
typhoid  fever  is  not.  The  diseases  are  communicated  in  an  entirely  dif- 
ferent manner.  The  characteristic  lesion  of  typhoid  fever  is  a  congestion 
and  tumefaction  of  Pyer's  patches  (i.  e.,  small  collections  of  intestinal 
glands).  In  distemper  the  mucous  membrane  lining  the  bowels,  when 
the  alimentary  tract  is  the  seat  of  the  action  of  the  virus,  may  be  ulcerated 
along  its  entire  course,"  but  the  patches  of  Pyer  are  not  particularly  affected 
and  never  display  those  lesions  so  characteristic  of  typhoid. 

"Of  the  various  diseases  man  is  subject  to,  measles  most  closely  re- 
sembles distemper  in  dogs.  Both  are  infectious  infantile  disorders  trans- 
mitted through  similar  channels,  and  one  attack  successfully  overcome 
renders  immunity  from  a  second  through  the  course  of  the  animal's  life, 
with  but  a  few  exceptions.  Catarrhal  symptoms,  pulmonary  complications 
and  dysentery  are  common  to  both;  convulsions  also  appear  in  both  measles 
and  distemper;  and  finally  the  principal  characteristic  of  measles,  viz:  the 
rash,  which  develops  on  the  face  coincident  with  the  disease,  spreading 
in  twenty-four  hours  to  all  parts  of  the  body,  resembles  the  rash  and 
pinkish  prickly  condition  of  the  skin  noticeable  in  some  cases  of  distemper 
in  the  first  stages,  and  the  pimples  that  break  out  along  the  back  and 
under  the  belly  and  thighs,  and  the  dandruff  and  desquamation  of  the 
cuticle  in  the  latter  stages  of  distemper. 

"The  cause  of  distemper  has  been  and  is  a  subject  that  has  been  dis- 
cussed and  disagreed  upon  by  authorities  and  breeders  of  experience  in  a 
very  interesting  manner.  Some  hold  to  the  opinion  that  it  may  arise 
spontaneously,  or  as  a  result  of  damp,  cold,  poorly  ventilated  kennels, 
defective  drainage,  exposure,  general  neglect,  improper  putrescent  food 
and  other  anti-hygienic  conditions.  More  modern  writers  hold  tenaciously 
to  the  germ  theory,  discarding  altogether  and  scoffing  at  the  theory  of 
spontaneity  as  being  based  solely  upon  negative  evidence  and  insist  that  the 
disease  arises  and  exists  solely  as  a  result  of  infection  of  the  system  by 
the  specific  virus  or  contagion  of  distemper,  and  claim  the  earlier  ideas 
of  spontaneous  origin  are  based  solely  upon  failure  to  account  for  the 
disease  by  infection,  and  to  observe  and  appreciate  the  remarkable  vitality 
of  the  germ  and  the  ease  and  innumerable  channels  by  which  it  can  be 
transmitted  from  an  infected  animal  to  one  that  was  to  all  intents  com- 
pletely isolated. 

"In  the  face  of  recent  scientific  investigation  and  discoveries,  and  in 
a  disease  so  specifically  contagious  as  distemper,  it  is  impossible  to  discard 
the  germ  theory.  The  distinctive  microbe  which  causes  the  disease — pro- 
bably a  bacillus — has  not  been  isolated;  but  the  virus  has  been  cultivated, 
and  in  the  seventh  generation  will  produce  the  disease  when  inoculated 
in  dogs,  and  still  further  attenuations  of  the  virus  will  produce  the  disease 
in  a  mild  form  which  affords  the  animal  protection  from  future  attacks. 
These  experiments,  while  not  successful  in  all  ways,  point  conclusively  to 
the  fact  that  it  is  only  a  question  of  time  when  this  disease  will  be  as 
successfully   inoculated   against   as   smallpox   is   in   the   human   family. 

"Most  dog  breeders  are  firm  in  the  conviction  that  they  have  had  cases 
arise  spontaneously,  and  the  rapid  dissemination  the  disease  works  under 
anti-hygenic  surroundings  will,  as  a  more  intimate  knowledge  of  the  life 
and  manner  in  which  specific  disease  producing  micro-organisms  operate, 
entitle  hygienic  surroundings,  such  as  food,  light  and  air,  to  an  equal 
footing  with  the  morbid  poison  so  far  as  the  severity  or  mortality  of  the 
disease   is   concerned. 

"Germs  and  microbes  of  various  kinds,  capable  of  producing  specific 
diseases,  are  found  everywhere  in  earth,  air  and  water.  All  animals  swal- 
low them  in  their  food,  breathe  them  into  their  lungs  in  countless  num- 
bers, and  the  body  is  at  all  times  in  contact  with  them,  nevertheless  they 
produce  no  disturbance  of  the  system.  In  experiments  microbes  introduced 
Into   the   blood   of   healthy   animal*   were   Inactive,   whereas   if   the   same 



an'mal  became  impoverished  and  weakened  through  foul  air,  impure  food 
or  water,  or  defective  elimination,  the  blood  became  impure  or  loaded 
with  decomposed  matter;  and  an  appropriate  pabulum  was  created  in 
which  the  germs  lived,  multiplied  and  set  up  their  specific  morbid  action 
to  the  detr.ment  and  possible  destruction  of  the  economy.  The  natural 
ccnclus  en  is  that  while  the  specific  germ  is  necessary  for  the  production 
of  a  specific  disease,  it  is  equally  essential  that  the  system  be  in  such  a 
condition  as  to  afford  a  proper  pabulum  for  the  reproduction,  which  is 
necessary  for  its  specific  action,  otherwise  it  would  be  overcome  by  the 
economy  and  eliminated  from  the  system;  just  as  grains  of  wheat  reproduce 
ihemseives  and  are  potent  under  proper  conditions  of  earth,  air,  water  and 
heat,  or  are  inert  and  disintegrate  when  thier  surroundings  are  unsuitable. 
"Germs  do  not  at  all  times  attack  the  same  organs  and  membranes. 
But  the  discharge  from  the  particular  set  affected  contains  the  virus  in  its 
most  concentrated  form.  This  accounts  for  the  dread  breeders  have  formed, 
through  experience,  of  the  nasal  discharges  of  an  affected  animal,  and  for 
the  v'gorous  objection  frequently  raised  at  a  dog  show  by  some  veteran 
owner  who  has  observed  a  careless  attendant  allowing  the  dogs  to  drink 
from  a  bucket  he  is  carrying  from  stall  to  stall  instead  of  filling  the  dogs' 
pans.  * 

"Distemper  is  not  transmissible  to  man,  but  is  to  cats,  wolves,  foxes, 
jackals,  hyenas  and  monkeys;  and  as  is  the  case  in  many  highly  conta- 
gious diseases,  one  attack  successfully  overcome  with  but  few  exceptions 
renders  immunity  from  a  second  attack  of  the  malady.  One  of  the  theo- 
ries advanced  as  an  explanation  of  this  fact  is  that  in  contagious  diseases 
the  specific  poison  combines  with  some  chemical  constituent  of  the  sys- 
tem which  is  essent'al  to  the  production  of  the  disease,  and  that  after 
tlrs  constituent  has  been  destroyed — as  it  will  be  through  combining  with 
the  germ- — and  the  animal  has  recovered  It  is  impossible  for  the  germ  to 
produce  system'c  disturbances  again  because  the  constituent  necessary  for 
its  combination   is  absent  from  the  system. 

"There  are  innumerable  channels  through  which  a  dog  may  be  infected 
with  distemper.  The  germ  is  of  remarkable  vitality,  and  is  conveyed 
through  the  air  or  on  a  person's  clothes,  or  a  dog  which  has  already  had 
the  disease  can  convey  the  germ  in  its  coat  from  a  sick  dog  to  a  well  one. 
The  use  of  kennels,  feeding  dishes,  or  shipping  crates  that  have  been 
previously  used  by  an  affected  animal  are  common  modes  of  inoculation. 
Dog  shows  are  a  fertile  source  of  the  spread  of  the  disease,  and  no  matter 
how  carefully  the  portable  benching  has  been  cleaned  and  disinfected  it  is 
always  more  or  less  a  conveyance  for  the  germs  that  produce  the  disease. 
"The  popular  fallacy  of  a  meat  diet  being  productive  of  distemper 
is  entirely  at  variance  with  all  scientific  knowledge,  as  all  carnivorous 
animals  are  markedly  free  from  specific  germ   diseases. 

"The  morbid  poison  of  distemper  attacks  dogs  in  different  ways,'  but 
breeders  and  pract;ticners  as  a  rule  recognize  as  typical  only  those  cases 
in  wh'ch  the  virus  affects  the  mucous  membranes  of  the  eyes  and  nasal 
passage  and  produces  a  catarrhal  discharge.  In  some  cases  the  intestinal 
tract  is  the  particu'ar  field  upon  which  the  virus  exerts  itself;  or  the 
liver  mav  be  affected,  or  the  bronchial  tubes."  But  the  action  of  the  virus 
that  i?  least  understood,  and  the  symptoms  most  commonly  ascribed  to 
some  other  cause,  is  when  it  is  concentrated  upon  the  brain  and  ner- 
vous system,  the  animal  dying  from  collapse  without  any  premonitory 
s  mptoms  or  developing  epileptic  spasms  and  convulsions,  and  other 
symptoms  that  the  breeder  ascribes  to  worms;  and  the  puppy  is  dosed 
accord  ngly.  I  have  lnd  such  cases  in  my  own  experience  as  a  breeder, 
a  d  mv  attention  has  been  frequently  called  to  this  condition  of  things 
bv  others  whose  puppies  have  died  in  from  a  few  hours  to  a  week  with 
all  th?  svmptoms  of  worm-fits,  careful  dissection,  however,  failing  to  reveal 
th  presence  of  th<*se  pests  or  any  other  exciting  cause;  and  distemper, 
from  an  absence  of  all  catarrhal  and  febril  symptoms,  would  be  the  last 
thing  thought  of. 

"An  attack  of  distemper  of  the  ordinary  catarrhal  form  is  usually  pre- 


ceded  by  listlessness  and  loss  of  appetite;  the  animal  avoids  the  light 
and  courts  solitude;  all  the  symptoms  of  a  common  cold  will  then  mani- 
fest themselves  rapidly,  as  sneezing,  a  dry  husky  cough  and  a  watery 
discharge  from  the  eyes  and  nose;  the  animal  shivers,  seeks  warmth  and 
is  feverish,  the  pulse  rang.ng  from  one  hundred  and  twenty  to  one  hundred 
and  fifty  beats  per  minute;  the  nose  is  hot  and  dry,  the  lining  of  the 
eye  reddened,  and  the  small  veins  that  radiate  through  the  white  portion 
are  injected  with  blood;  the  tongue  is  coated,  the  secretion  of  saliva  is  dim  n- 
ished,  thiist  is  excessive,  food  is  rejected  and  prostiation  is  well  marked 
and  so  rapid  that  at  the  end  of  a  week  the  dog  can  hardly  stand;  the  bowels 
are  irregular;  in  the  early  stages  of  the  disease  there  is  a  tendency  to  con- 
stipation, but  the  matter  in  the  intestines-  through  failure  to  digest  sets 
up  an  irritation,  and  the  discharges  are  more  frequent  and  looser  than  in 
health,  and  the  feces  are  dark  colored  and  fetid.  The  discharges  from  the 
eyes  and  nose  become  purulent,  the  nostrils  are  covered,  with  a  glassy, 
yellowish  fluid,  the  cough  increases  in  frequency,  the  bronchial  tubes  fill 
with  mucus,  which  is  coughed  up,  giving  temporary  relief;  the  animal  vomits 
frothy  yellow  matter  and  is  unable  to  retain  food  upon  the  stomach;  the 
eyelids  become  glued  together,  resulting  in  blinding  the  patient;  breathing 
is  obstructed  by  matter  in  the  nostrils;  the  breath  becomes  fetid  and  has  a 
smell  that  is  peculiar  to  the  disease;  the  lips  are  covered  with  ulcers,  and 
the  animal  either  becomes  weaker  and  weaker  and  finally  succumbs,  or  at 
the  end  of  twelve  or  fourteen  days  the  symptoms  mentioned  above  abate 
in  intensity  and  the  animal  slowly  retails  its  strength.  Complications, 
however,  frequently  develop  early  in  the  disease,  and  result  in  the  death 
of  the  animal. 

"One  of  the  complications  of  distemper  is  pneumonia,  or  inflammation 
of  the  lungs,  brought  on  by  exposure  to  cold  or  by  a  weakened  heart  action. 
The  animal  will  not  lie  down,  but  assumes  a  sitting  position  with  the  fore- 
legs braced  and  separated,  the  head  hangs  heavily,  breathing  is  labored, 
lapid  and  heavy,  and  upon  application  of  the  ear  to  the  chest,  a  dry  cracking 
sound  will  be  heard  similar  to  that  made  when  walking  upon  dry  snow 
with   a   clean   boot. 

"Epileptic  fits  are  another  complication,  These  as  a  rule  come  on 
suddenly.  There  is  a  slight  quivering  of  the  muscles  of  the  face,  and 
an  anxious  look  around,  a  few  staggering  steps,  and  the  animal  falls  upon 
its  side  and  loses  consciousness;  the  face  becomes  distorted,  the  limbs 
work  violently,  and  there  is  a  continued  champing  of  the  jaws  as  well 
fts  a  frothy  mucus  coming  from  the  mouth;  the  head,  limbs  and  body 
jerk  violently,  the  convulsions  gradually  become  less  and  less,  though 
sometimes  the  animal  comes  out  of  them  suddenly  and  appears  dazed  and 
scared,  and  will  attempt,  to  hide  in  some  out  of  the  way  place. 

"Vomiting  and  purging  are  prominent  complications,  and  sometimes 
there  is  true  dysentery  in  which  the  feces  are  streaked  with  blood. 

"In  summing  up  this  disease  and  arriving  at  a  proper  treatment  we 
must  be  rn'ndful  of  the  fact  that  all  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  are  the 
direct  results  of  a  morbid  virus  existing  in  the  system,  and  that  the  course 
it  runs,  although  indefinite,  is  nevertheless  certain,  and  the  a'm  should 
be  directed  not  only  at  the  disease,  but  at  sustaining  the  system  so  as  to 
enable  it  to  withstand  the  debilitating  effects  of  the  virus  and  the  febrile 
condition  it  gives  rise  to.  The  promiscuous  administrations  of  exhaust- 
ing and  dangerous  medicines,  such  as  many  dog  owners  and  veterinar- 
ians are  to  indulge  in,  cannot  be  too  highly  condemned. 

"Warm  quarters,  good  care  and  nursing  are  the  prime  factors  in  the 
successful  treatment  of  this  disease.  Judicious  medical  treatment  is  of 
unquestionable  service  in  hold'ng  the  disease  in  check,  a'laviating  alarm- 
ing symptoms,  preventing  destructive  complication  and  hastening  convales- 
cence. But  no  matter  how  skillfully  applied  it  will  be  without  ava;l  if 
the  nursing  and  attendance  are  neglected,  whereas,  many  dogs,  properly 
cared  for,  make  nice  recoveries  without  medical  assistance.  Place  the 
patient  in  warm,  comfortable  quarters,  absolutely  free  from  drafts;  see 
that  his  bedding  is  changed,  daily,  and  all  discharge  from  the  nose  and 


eyes  sponged  away  as  gently  as  possible  with  warm  water,  bo  as  not  to 
disturb  the  patient.  The  food  offered  should  be  highly  nutritious  and 
easily  digestible,  such  as  beef  tea  or  mutton  broth  thickened  with  rice  or 
well  boiled  oatmeal.  The  feeding  dishes  and  drinking  pans  must  be 
scrupulously  clean,  as  dirty  pans  will  nauseate  a  sick  animal  and  destroy 
what  little  appetite  it  may  have.  Scraped  raw  beef  is  very  nutritious 
and  can  be  mixed  with  gelatine;  a  dog  will  frequently  eat  this  when  it 
will  refuse  everything  else.  "When  the  appetite  fails  altogether  and  the 
animal  refuses  to  eat,  food  must  be  forced  down  its  throat  at  least  four 
times  a  day.  For  this  use  beef  extracts  or  beef  tea  with  the  addition  of  a 
raw  egg,  a  cupful  at  a  time  four  times  a  day  for  a  fifty-pound  dog;  and 
if  that  quantity  irritates  the  stomach  it  must  be  divided  and  given  oftener. 
If  the  patient  becomes  very  weak  a  little  sherry  or  brandy  must  be  given 
in  milk  punches  to  keep  up  the  general  strength. 

"In  the  first  stage  of  the  disease  the  bowels  are  generally  irregular, 
due  to  the  accumulation  of  undigested  matter  in  the  intestines;  it  is  ad- 
visable to  move  this  by  a  dose  of  castor  oil,  varying  in  quantiy  from  a  tea- 
spoonful  for  a  small  dog  to  an  ounce  and  a  half  for  a  large  dog. 

"After  this  has  operated  the  most  useful  drug  I  have  found  for  rati- 
fying the  system  against  the  ravages  of  the  poison  and  checking  what 
would  otherwise  be  a  severe  attack  is  hyposulphite  of  soda.  The  particular 
property  of  this  drug  either  within  or  without  the  system  is  to  destroy  fer- 
ments and  bacteria,  and  experiments  have  conclusively  proven  its  benefits 
in  all  diseases  where  morbid  poisons  are  at  work.  Blood  drawn  from  dogs 
that  have  been  given  thirty  grains  a  day  for  five  days  kept  fresh  for  three 
weeks;  the  blood  of  dogs  similarly  treated  with  the  exception  of  not  having 
the  sulphate  became  putrid  in  three  or  four  days.  Dogs  that  had  re- 
ceived the  sulphite  in  thirty  grain  dosps  with  their  food  for  five  days  and 
were  then  injected  with  fetid  pus  or  the  purulent  discharge  from  a  glan- 
dered  horse  reeled,  tottered,  and  were  unable  to  walk  for  a  few  hours, 
but  at  the  end  of  five  davs  recovered  their  health  and  appetite,  the  wound 
where  the  injection  had  been  made  healing  nicely.  Dogs  treated  similarly 
in  every  way  with  the  exception  of  not  having  previously  received  the 
hyposulphite  died  in  from  the  fourth  to  the  sixth  day  with  a  purulent  dis- 
charge from  the  eyes  and  nostrils,  and  the  point  where  the  injection  was 
made  became  gangrenous.  The  dose  of  this  drug  is  from  two  to  twenty 
grains,  depending  upon  the  age  and  size  of  the  patient,  and  the  condition 
of  the  bowels;   if  they  become  too  loose  the  dose  must  be  decreased. 

"Quinine  Is  another  drug  of  great  value  in  the  treatment  of  distemper 
and  all  febrile  conditions.  Its  use  is,  however,  abused  from  a  failure  to 
understand  its  real  action!  as  a  rule  too  large  doses  are  given  and  at  too 
frequent  intervals.  The  action  of  quinine,  besides  lowering  temperature 
and  pulsation,  is  in  small  doses  tonic  and  stimulating,  increasing  the 
apnetite  and  all  digestive  secretions;  in  large  doses  continued  it  is  de- 
pressing and  destrovs  the  appetite.  It  has  remarkable  antiseptic  proner- 
ti>s,  attacking  and  destroying  all  pernicious  micro-organisms.  A  full  dose 
(five  grains  for  a  St.  Bernard)  given  at  the  first  sign  of  lassitude  and  de- 
fection of  nremonitorv  svmptoms  of  an  attack  of  distemper,  while  it  mav 
Tint  prevpnt  the  disease,  will  certainly  moderate  it.  Its  use  should 
then  be  discontinued  until  the  fifth  or  sixth  day  of  the  disease,  when 
small  doses  of  from  one  to  five  grains  should  be  given  three  times  a  day, 
but  discontinued  if  any  signs  of  disagreeing  with  the  dog  are  shown. 

"Pulmonary  complications  can  be  relieved  bv  applying  hot  flannels  to 
the  sides  or  the  use  of  hot  water  bags.  Hot  fomentations  or  bandages 
wrung  out  of  warm  water  do  more  harm  than  good,  as  the  animal  gen- 
erally gets  chilled  while  they  are  being  used. 

"Nitrate  of  potash  may  be  given  in  the  dog's  drinking  water  or  in 
s'x  to  fifteen  grain  doses;  it  reduces  fever  and  stimulates  the  action  of  the 
kidneys. 

"If  the  pulse  and  temperature  are  very  high  a  few  doses  of  veratrum 
can  be  given  with  advantage,  but  not  continued  for  more  than  two  daya. 


The  dose  is  from  one-tenth  to  one-third  of  a  grain  of  the  powder,  at  in- 
tervals of  three  or  four  hours. 

"Epileptic  fits  and  nervous  symptoms  are  difficult  to  treat  with  any 
degree  of  success  during  the  course  of  the  disease.  If  they  are  due  to 
reflex  action,  as  from  the  patient  cutting  teeth,  lance  the  gums;  if  due  to 
worms,  the  system  is  generally  too  debilitated  to  stand  the  powerful  drugs 
necessary  to  remove- or  destroy  these  pests.  The  patient,  however,  can  be 
temporarily  relieved  by  bromide  in  doses  of  from  five  to  twenty  grains, 
four  or  five  times  a  day,  either  in  a  capsule  or  a  watery  solution.  If  the 
excitement  is  extreme  the  bromide  can  be  combined  with  from  three  to 
ten  grains  of  chloral.  The  latter  drug,  when  administered,  should  be  mixed 
with   syrup   of  mucilage  to   prevent  its  irritating  the  throat. 

"Vomiting  should,  if  possible,  be  prevented  by  carefully  selecting 
those  foods  that  ihe  stomach  seems  best  able  to  digest,  but  if  it  is  so 
irritable  as  to  expel  the  most  easily  digested  foods,  give  from  two  to  four 
drops  of  Scheele's  strength  of  hydrocyanic  acid,  combined  with  from  two 
to  eight  grains  of  pepsin,  which  will  relieve  the  irritability  of  the  digestive 
organs   and   stop    the   vomiting. 

"Diarrhea  must  not  be  too  hurriedly  checked,  unless  the  discharges  are 
so  frequent  as  to  debilitate  the  animal.  In  mild  cases  give  paregoric  in  from 
one-half  to  two  teaspoonful  doses,  and  if  that  is  not  effectual  a  mixture 
of  from  five  to  ten  grains  of  chalk  and  from  five  to  fifteen  drops  of  ether 
and  laudanum  may  be  given  in  a  little  milk  or  soup. 

"In  arriving  at  the  proper  close  of  the  various  drugs  I  have  recom- 
mended, the  minimum  dose  is  suitable  for  clogs  weighing,  when  developed, 
from  fifteen  to  thirty  pounds,  and  the  maximum  is  for  clogs  that  will  weigh 
in  the  vicinity  of  one  hundred  pounds.  Larger  or  smaller  animals  should 
have  the  dose  correspondingly  increased  or  decreased,  as  the  case  may  be. 
Puppies  six  months  of  age  will  stand  half  the  dose  given  a  grown  animal 
of  the  same  breed,  and  for  puppies  under  six  months  a  corresponding  di- 
minution of  the  dose  must  be  made. 

"In  conclusion  I  again  desire  to  caution  the  owner  against  exposing 
puppies  to  cold  during  the  course  of  the  disease,  or  when  the  patient  begins 
to  convalesce.  Frequently  in  cases  of  distemper  a  very  decided  improve- 
ment in  the  condition  of  the  patient  will  be  observed,  and  the  owner  cor- 
respondingly elated  and  encouraged  by  a  spring-like,  sunny  day,  particu- 
larly if  the  weather  has  been  previously  damp  and  stormy,  he  will  admit 
the  puppy  to  the  kennel  yard  for  breath  of  fresh  air.  The  puppy  in  most 
cases,  after  blinking  at  the  sun  and  stretching,  will  select  the  dampest  spot 
that  the  sun  strikes  in  the  kennel  yard  and  curl  itself  up.  A  few  moment's 
exposure  under  these  conditions  is  sufficient,  and  the  next  morning  the  old 
symptoms,  with  incerased  severity,  are  present,  or  the  little  fellow's  la- 
bored breathing  indicates  too  plainly  the  fatal  inflammation  and  conges- 
tion of  the  lungs." 

The  following  is  valuable  on  this  disease:  A.  J.  Sewell,  M.  D.  C.  V.  S., 
who  has  lately  been  appointed  veterinarian  surgeon  to  the  King  of  Eng- 
land, gives  the  following  advice  regarding  the  spreading  of  distemper: 

"As  distemper  just  now  seems  particularly  prevalent,  and  the  largo 
shows  recently  held  are  sure  to  increase  the  number  of  cases,  this  article 
will  assist  readers  in  recognizing  the  disease  at  the  commencement,  so  that 
the  infected  animal  may  be  isolated  early,  and  thus  prevent,  if  possible,  the 
spread  of  the  disease  to  other  dogs,  especially  young  puppies,  which  have 
always  a  very  poor  chance  of  recovering. 

"I  know  some  few  people,  if  they  get  a  case  of  distemper  in  their 
kennels,  take  no  means  of  preventing  it  spreading;  on  the  contrary,  I  have 
heard  them  say  that  they  let  all  those  puppies  which  have  not  had  the 
disease  come  purposely  in  contact  with  the  sick, one,  so  as  to  let  all  those 
have  it  that  will,  and  get  over  it  for  the  time  being.  I  must  confess  this 
is  not  my  practice  with  my  own  dogs;  on  the  contrary,  I  take  every  possible 
precaution  T  can  to  prevent  them  having  it,  and  I  know  most  breeders  are 
as  ^anxious   as   myself avoid   it. 

"As  shows  are  no  doubt   the  greatest  source  of  spreading   distemper, 

I  advise  that  all  clogs  coming  from  these  places  which  have  not  had  the 
disease  should  not  be  returned  home  if  there  is  any  young  stock  in  the 
kennels  that  one  does  not  wish  to  be  infected,  and  the  farther  they  are 
kept  away  the  better.  Not  only  is  this  necessary,  but  a  separate  attendant 
is  required.  If  you  have  the  same  man,  you  may  as  well  have  the  same 
kennel.  If  these  suggestions  are  adopted  there  will  not  be  the  least  danger 
of  the  disease  spreading,  and  I  feel  pretty  sure,  if  people  would  properly 
isolate  all  distemper  cases  the  disease  might  be  almost,  if  not  entirely, 
eradicated    from    the   country. 

"The  first  symptom  of  distemper  is  a  rise  of  temperature — if  a  dog 
is  dull  and  off  his  food,  take  his~"temperature.  It  is  best  to  take  it  in  the 
rectum,  where  the  normal  is  about  one  hundred  and  one  to  one  hundred 
and  one  and  one-half  degrees  Fahrenheit;  if  taken  under  the  arm  or  inside 
the  thigh  it  is  one  degree  lower.  If  the  thermometer-  registers  two  or 
three  degrees  of  temperature  above  normal  you  may  be  sure  there  is  some- 
thing wrong,  and  the  dog  should  be  isolated  at  once;  and  by  doing  this  the 
infection  may  often  be  prevented  spreading.  If  the  disease  is  distemper 
other  symptoms  will  soon  develop,  as  a  husky  cough,  loss  of  appetite  and 
condition,  and  occasionally  vomiting.  The  eyes  are  weak  and  sensitive  to 
light,  and  there  is  often  a  little  gummy  discharge  which  collects  along  the 
edges  of  the  lids;  the  breath  is  offensive,  and  the  teeth  become  furred. 
Diarrhea  may,  or  may  not,  occur.  If  the  illness  is  only  some  passing  ail- 
ment the  temperature  will  soon  be  normal,  and  the  dog  assume  his  usual 
condition.  But  the  temperature,  even  in  distemper,  after  two  or  three 
days,  may  go  down  to  normal;  but  do  not  be  deceived  by  this,  and  think 
the  dog  is  all  right,  but  look  out  for  some  of  the  other  symptoms  men- 
tioned, and  if  the  dog  is  in  for  that  disease  they  are  sure  to  appear,  and 
the  fever  will  return  again  in  a  couple  of  days  or  so. 

"People  often  think  a  dog  cannot  have  distemper  without  there  is  a 
discharge  from  the  nose;  this  is  a  mistake,  but  it  certainly  does  occur 
in  most  cases,  though  it  does  not  appear  as  a  rule  until  the  dog  has  been 
ill  for  some  time.  If  the  lungs  become  affected  the  breathing  is  short 
and  quick,  not  panting  with  the  mouth  open,  the  chest  is  tender  on  pres- 
sure. At  first  there  is  no  cough,  but  after  two  or  three  days  there  is  a 
suppressed  painful  cough,  with  retching.  The  pulse  is  often  much  acceler- 
ated, the  beats  varying  from  one  hundred  and  ten  to  one  hundred  and 
forty  per  minute.  In  some  cases  the  pulse  is  very  slow,  and  may  only 
be  forty-eight  to  the  minute;  of  course,  this  refers  to  a  big  dog.  A  pulse 
of  this  kind  is  worse  than  a  fast  one  with  pneumonia.  When  it  is  between 
sixty  and  seventy  in  a  small  dog  it  is  also  serious  with  lung  complications. 
The  heart's  action  in  dogs  is  very  frequently  intermittent  even  in  health. 
The  eyes  during  distemper  are  often  a  source  of  anxiety,  and  in  those  dogs 
with  prominent  orbits,  as  spaniels,  pugs,  etc.,  there  is  always  a'n  inclination 
for  ulcers  to  form,  which  are  extremely  painful." 

The  following  was  written  by  "Westerner"  and  published  in  Field 
and  Fancy.  We  cannot  know  too  much  on  this  most  dreaded  disease  so  I 
give   the   article   entire: 

Distemper  in  Dogs. 

"Each  year  brings  around  its  popular  dog  shows,  and  in  these  days 
when  nothing  is  thought  of  high  prices  being  paid  for  good  specimens  in 
most  all  the  breeds,  many  of  which  after  winning  fame  in  public  competition 
succumb  to  distemper,  the  American  pulic  is  in  need  of  some  sound  advice, 
which  will,  if  faithfully  followed,  save  the  lives  of  innumerable  dogs.  It 
is  said  (hat  whoever  discovers  a  sure  specific  cure  for  distemper  in  dogs 
will  have  made  his  fortune,  for  probably  60  per  cent  of  all  the  thorough- 
bred dogs  bred  annually  die  of  this  dread  disease,  at  periods  generally 
following  the  large  shows  in  Eastern  cities.  The  following  practical  sug- 
gestions and  observations  based  upon  the  experience  of  many  years  .of 
breeding  and  raising,  are  likely  not  new  to  some  owners,  but  will  be  found 


most  helpful  by  the  yearly  increasing  number  of  novices,  and  result  in  an 
absolute  knowledge  of  how  to  avoid  fatal  results. 

"We  know  that  distemper  commonly  develops  during  the  first  year 
of  life,  either  at  periods  known  to  be  associated  with  teeth  formation  or 
approaching  physical  maturity. 

"Primarily,  distemper,  at  its  inception,  shows  a  disturbed  and  inflam- 
ed condition  of  the  membraneous  tissue  of  the  alimentary  canal.  It  is 
likely  a  condition  corresponding  to  typhoid,  as  some  maintain.  Its  germ 
certainly  finds  ready  cultivation  in  the  unhealthy  conditions  which  result 
from  worms.  Its  first  usual  symptom  is  a  hard  bronchial  cough,  with 
some  retching,  irritated  by  excitement  or  nervousness,  all  no  doubt  caused 
by  the  stomach's  disturbed  membraneous  condition.  Whether  at  two  or 
three  months,  or  at  six  or  ten  months,  or  any  age,  the  first  thing  to  do  when 
this  cough  appears  is  to  chain  the  dog  up  in  some  inside  quarters  where  air 
is  good  and  floor  dry.  Here  is  where  the  first  mistake  generally  takes  place. 
The  fond  owner,  thinking  because  the  dog  is  lively,  that  his  cough  is  noth- 
ing more  than  some  slight  throat  irritation  or  cold,  allows  the  dog  to  sleep 
out  in  all  kinds  of  weather,  which  conditions  soon  develop  acute  bronchial 
troubles,  generally  pneumonia,  and  in  most  every  case  pneumonia  is  fatal 
in  dog-life. 

"Distemper  develops  much  slower  than  generally  thought  for.  A  dog 
is  first  noticed  to  be  'off  his  food;'  soon  the  cough  is  noticed  in  the  morning 
and  toward  night,  and  in  a  week  or  ten  days  it  is  more  than  likely  that 
the  eyes  show  a  sticky  discharge  and  the  nose  sooner  or  later  begins  per- 
haps to  discharge  likewise  thick  purulent  yellow  mucus.  Many  a  strong 
healthy  dog  will  not  show  the  effects  of  the  early  stages  of  the  disease, 
but  later  break  down  all  at  once,  as  it  gradually  increases  to  some  climax 
with  him.  If  the  mucous  discharge  stage  is  reached,  the  owner  can  count 
on  a  month  or  more  of  close  confinement. 


PURE  food  is  the  dog's  greatest  need.  The 
foremost  veterinarians  agree  that  nearly 
all  ordinary  dog  troubles  are  traceable  to  impro- 
per feeding.  Foods  manufactured  from  waste 
products  and  scraps  are  not  proper  foods. 



"Of  great  importance  is  the  isolation  of  the  patient,  chained  up  free 
from  activity  and  excitement  from  other  dogs.  If  your  puppy  is  young, 
and  you  have  an  old  bitch  (that  has  had  the  distemper),  no  harm  can 
follow  shutting  her  in  with  the  patient.  She  will  aid  the  puppy  in  keeping 
clean  and  be  very  helpful  in  quieting  him.  Your  chances  are  that  if  this 
first  move  is  made  promptly,  and  faithfully  adhered  to,  your  dog  will  have 
but  a  'mild  case,'  and  thus  be  saved  all  of  the  deleterious  effects  of  the 
ravages  of  the  disease  in  its  worst  forms,  and  in  a  couple  of  weeks  be  over 
it.  The  dog  that  is  kept  chained  up  from  the  very  first  symptoms,  stores 
up  his  vital  energy  and  strength,  and  has  the  benefit  of  it  when  any  climax 
of  the  disease  develops. 

"In  treatment,  the  writer  does  not  believe  in  the  speedy  use  of  any 
medicine;  the  less  used  the  better  you  are  off,  and  the  clog,  generally. 
If  at  first  your  dog  is  suddenly  prostrated,  as  is  common,  one  good,  large 
dose  of  rochelle  salts  or  castor  oil  is  a  good  beginning.  If  indications  of 
worms  are  present  treat  for  their  removal.  If  the  patient  refuses  food  for 
a  couple  of  days,  it  will  do  no  harm  to  let  him  go  without,  but  rather 
good.  The  first  stage  is  no  time  to  force  food,  but  on  the  contrary,  does 
injury.  Should  much  mucous  discharge  develop  at  the  eyes  and  nose,  and 
a  general  fevered  condition  exist,  with  quick  breathing  and  much  loss 
of  energy,  quinine  in  moderate  doses,  or  any  tried  'grippe'  tablet  that 
has  been  found  good  in  family  use  will  prove  beneficial.  In  giving  any  such 
medicines  use  caution  as  to  overdosing,  considering  well  the  age  and  size 
of  the  patient,  and  not  oftener  than  once  in  three  or  four  hours,  bearing  in 
mind  its  irritating  effect  on  the  stomach  tissues.  The  condition  of  the  stom- 
ach is  the  most  important  factor  to  keep  in  mind,  for  on  getting  the  dog 
back  to  a  good  appetite  depends  his  recovery.  He  must  have  the  ability 
to  digest  and  assimilate  his  food,  as  well  as  to  eat  it,  in  order  that  its 
strength-giving  properties  can  help  overcome  the  deleterious  effects  of  the 
disease,  as  the  effect  of  this  foreign  germ  life  in  the  system  advances  in 
its  attack  on  the  system. 

"Right  here,  begin  at  once,  something  that  will,  if  followed  up  regu- 
larly, allay  the  development  of  the  worst  tendencies  of  the  disease.  After 
the  general  cleansing,  begin  to  give,  three  or  four  times  a  day  for  several 
days  and  continually  as  long  as  its  helpfulness  is  indicated  a  tablet  that 
can  be  purchased  from  any  druggist,  being  a  compound  of  pepsin  (one  or 
two  grains,  according  to  age),  bismuth  and  charcoal.  These  tablets  are 
inexpensive  and  should  be  given  after  each  meal,  if  the  patient  takes 
food,  and,  if  not,  four  times  a  day.  They  are  easily  taken  or  given,  and 
their  beneficial  effect  will  soon  be  observed.  They  will  soothe  the  inflamed 
membraneous  tissues  and  aid  the  proper  digestion  of  food  and  its  assimi- 
lation. 

"In  distemper,  the  feces  are  usually  of  a  greenish,  rank,-  pungent  char- 
acter, indicating  a  decidedly  unhealthy  condition  of  the  bowels,  in  the  cause 
of  which  both  stomach  indigestion  and  intestinal  indigestion  and  lack  of 
assimilation  undoubtedly  share.  This  condition,  if  allowed  to  remain  with- 
out attention  results  in  what  is  known  as  the  ulcerous  and  intestinal  form 
of  the  disease  which  commonly  develops  when  owners  are  too  anxious  to 
keep  their  clogs  eating  rich  food,  when  the  dog's  system  cannot  properly 
handle  it.  There  is  no  necessity  for  this  form  of  the  disease  ever  develop- 
ing.    It  is  its  worst  form  when  advanced,  and  results  in  most  cases  fatally. 

"These  simple  and  harmless  tablets  will  first  digest  the  food  and  en- 
able the  dos  to  assimilate  it.  They  soothe  and  tone  up  the  inflamed  intes- 
tinal conditions  and  gradually  make  a  dog's- appetite  good  again  and  slowly 
but  surelv  brins  about  the  conditions  which  permit  healthy,  well  formed 
feces.  When  this  is  accomplished  more  than  half  the  battle  is  fought,  for 
so  long  as  the  dog  is  running  off  in  a  diarrheal  condition  the  distemper 
germ  seems  to  thrive,  producing  all  sorts  of  gastrical  and  intestinal  trou- 
bles, which  are  difficult  to  cure.  Many  make  the  mistake  of  treating  with 
stringents  for  diarrhea,  which  naturally  only  cause  more  harm,  as  the  cause 
is  not  first  removed.  There  need  be  no  fear  whatever  in  the  moderate 
use  of  these  tablets,  for  they  can  produce  no  harmful  effects  whatever,  and 

even  should  they  be  given  without  sufficient  cause  therefor  existing,  they 
would  be  but  a  tonic  and  help  to  any  normal  conditions.  All  dogs  (espe- 
cially puppies)  are  prone  to  overeat,  bolt  their  food  and  tax  too  greatly 
their  digestive  organs.  Dogs  in  their  tramp  and  native  state  have  no  such 
troubles.  While  our  modern  blooded  breeding  has  given  us  unbroken 
lineage  in  fine  pedigrees,  the  dog  constitution,  due  perhaps  to  the  con- 
fined kennel  life  most  have  to  put  up  with,  is  not  as  vigorous  at  it  would 
otherwise  be.  Many  a  stud  dog  and  brood  bitch  hardly  ever  get  out  of  a 
kennel  yard!  need  it  be  wondered  at,  then,  that  the  blue-blooded  puppies 
inherit  digestive  organs  that  need  some  help  now  and  then,  and  are  sus- 
ceptible subjects  of  contagion  which  develops  at  most  shows?  Fresh  air 
and  nice  quarters  tend  to  produce  a  healthy  environment  in  a  kennel,  but 
as  the  young  puppie  adds  bone  and  tissue  much  faster  than  is  generally 
considered,  the  organs  that  are  responsible  for  this  growth,  great  in  pro- 
portion to  size  as  it  is,  and  speedy  development,  need  as  much  general 
support  as  it  is  possible  to  give  them. 

"If  your  patient  is  well  advanced  in  the  purulent  mucus  discharge  or 
acute  bronchial  stage,  before  you  get  at  him,  which  is  usual  in  the  exper- 
ience of  amateurs,  begin  at  once  and  conform  rigidly  to  treat  as  here- 
tofore suggested,  adding  the  possible  help  of  some  distemper  medicine. 
While  these  undoubtedly  when  properly  used  are  very  helpful,  they  are  at 
best  but  stimulating  tonics  and  fever  medicines,  and  it  is  well  to  have  on 
hand  whichever  one  you  find  gives  good  results.  Should  the  patient  show 
general  debility  and  indications  of  the  disease  rather  generally  poisoning 
the  system — in  fact,  if  the  nasal  form  develops,  lose  no  time  in  arranging 
to  put  in  a  seton.  Any  veterinary  can  do  it,  but  you  can  do  it  yourself 
fully  as  well,  as  follows:  Clip  the  hair  on  neck  back  of  skull  close  to  skin 
for  three  or  four  inches  square.  Secure  a  piece  of  ordinary  (tarred)  tar- 
paulin or  common  hemp  cord,  which  should  be  soaked  in  a  solution  of 
carbolic  acid  and  water.  Cut  cord  at  length  of  eight  or  ten  inches.  Catch 
one  end  of  it  in  the  joint  of  a  pair  of  small  curved  sharp-pointed  nail 
scissors  or  sail-cloth  needle;  hold  skin  just  below  occiput  of  skull  bone, 
well  up  away  from  inner  tissues  and  puncture  point  through  from  one 
side  of  neck  to  the  other,  drawing  cord  through  so  that  holes  will  be  about 
two  inches  apart;  tie  good  large  knots  in  each  end  of  cord,  dressing  at 
nrst  with  antiseptic  vaseline,  and  leave  it  in  for  from  five  to  ten  days, 
dependent  upon  profuseness  of  discharge.  Draw  cord  from  knot  to  knot 
each  day  often,  in  order  to  keep  outlet  free.  The  insertion  of  this  seton  is 
not  particularly  painful,  as  it  passes  through  the  outer  skin  covering  only, 
and  can  do  no  harm  whatever.  It  should  be  kept  as  clean  as  possible.  It 
acts  as  a  counter  irritant  and  drains  off  from  the  system  a  large  amount 
of  poisonous  accumulations  and  will  very  soon  relieve  the  head  of  the  acute 
troubles  there  concentrated. 

In  almost  all  cases  where  the  seton  is  used  soon  enough  its  aid  is 
largely  responsible  for  safe  recovery.  The  writer  has  seen  most  wonderful 
cures  by  its  assistance  in  the  last  stages  of  the  disease.  It  use  is  of  Eng- 
lish origin,  and  one  theory  advanced  to  explain  its  benefit  in  dogs  is  that 
as  a  dog  perspires  only  through  the  glands  of  nose  and  mouth,  and  never 
through  the  outer  skin  and  coat,  this  outlet  affords  an  immediate  drain 
much  needed  to  carry  off  the  poisonous  accumulations  about  the  inner  body 
tissues.  When  the  system  is  generally  much  poisoned  with  effects  of  dis- 
temper, this  drain  is  very  beneficial  and  never  harmful.  Leave  it  in  until 
the  discharge  begins  to  subside,  then  cut  one  end  of  the  cord  and  take 
it  out.  Keep  sore  clean  until  healed,  which  will  be  accomplished  within 
a  few  days,  and  in  a  month  a  new  growth  of  coat  will  have  covered  up 
the  effect  of  this  treatment,  so  that  no  scars  are  left  as  a  blemish  on  the 
patient's  neck. 

Many  dog  owners  have  special  food  theories  for  distemper,  a  popular 
delusion  being  that  meat  fed  to  young  dogs  produces  distemper.  All  young 
dogs  should  have  meat  in  moderation,  and  don't  forget  that  dogs  need  salt 
in  their  food,  as  well  as  the  human  race  and  animals.  The  frequent  con- 
tinual diet  absolutely  without  salt  is  sufficient  to  cause  most  any  kind  of 

ailment.  The  writer's  observation  has  been  that  a  dog  in  distemper  gets 
along  best  when  given  limited  quantities  of  what  it  craves,  three  to  five 
times  daily,  always  bearing  in  mind  the  aim  to  make  the  stomach's  work 
easy.  Raw  (fresh)  beef  cut  fine  on  bread,  fed  three  or  four  times  daily, 
is  most  excellent.  If  milk  is  relied  upon,  sterilize  it  (rather  than  boil) 
and  give  in  moderate  quantities.  Raw  eggs  with  milk  is  generally  very 
good  and  strengthening.  Avoid  alcoholic  stimulants,  except  when  dog  is 
badly  off,  then  give  whiskey  and  quinine  as  tonic,  and  maybe  a  little  port 
wine  with  milk.  The  following  few  important  and  brief  "dont's"  will  aid 
some  as  occasional  reminders  and  cautions,  viz.: 

Don't  pour  food  down  a  sick  dog  when  he  hasn't  the  ability  to  either 
hold  or  digest  it.     It  only  makes  him  worse. 

Don't  exercise  a  dog  sick  with  distemper. 

Don't  let  a  day  pass  without  proper  use  of  compound  tablets  (pepsin, 
bismuth  and  charcoal). 

Don't  get  scared  if  your  dog  won't  eat.  It's  better  for  him  not  to  eat 
until  he  can  handle  his  food  rightly.     He  won't  die  of  starvation. 

Don't  allow  him  to  get  his  feet  wet.  This  is  likely  to  bring  on  pneu- 
monia, which  is  generally  fatal. 

Don't  wash  a  dog,  no  matter  how  foul  he  may  be,  when  down  with 
distemper  or  convalescent.  Brush,  comb  and  clean  with  powder  (flour). 
Many  a  dog  has  contracted  incurable  chorea  and  its  twitches  from  a  bath 
too  soon  after  distemper.  Keep  him  away  from  the  water  for  three  months 
at  least. 

Don't  let  your  dog  off  chain  as  soon  as  he  begins  to  feel  better.  Keep 
him  there  till  well,  leading  him  for  exercise  only  when  convalescent.  Re- 
lapses are  common  and  often  fatal. 

When  your  patient  is  once  well  over  distemper  you  can  risk  him  any- 
where, for  dogs  do  not  have  the  real  thing  but  once.  If  your  dog's  sys- 
tem is  left  very  much  run  down,  blood  tonics  are  good,  according  to  indi- 
vidual  needs,    Scott's    Emulsion    being   especially    beneficial. 

The  most  important  safeguards  to  bear  in  mind  are:  (1)  Absolute  quiet 
on  chain  in  dry  quarters.  (2)  Tablets  regularly  given  and  constant  care. 
(3)  The  seton  promptly  put  in  before  the  case  has  advanced  to  the  fatal 
or  acute  form  of  the  disease.  Distemper  in  itself  is  not  fatal,  but  the  com- 
plications and  collateral  developments  it  leads  to  are.  Whoever  faithfully 
follows  the  suggestions  given  in  this  article  need  have  no  fear  of  any  fatal 
results  from  distemper.  The  ideas  herein  formulated  are  but  the  result 
of  years  of  practical  experience  of  varying  results  with  young  setters. 
Common  sense  is  the  underlying  principle  of  it  all,  which  after  all,  if  used 
in  time,  is  far  better  than  medicine.  We  hear  of  all  kinds  of  "cures," 
including  those  who  still  have  faith  in  "coffee,"  the  pellet  of  "buckshot," 
or  dose  of  "gunpowder,"  together  with  other  harsher  specifics  and  meth- 
ods of  treatment.  Should  we  not  give  our  priceless  clogs,  whose  value 
every  year  is  increasing  with  their  educated  usefulness  and  close  com- 
panionableness,  the  benefit  of  up-to-date  intelligent  care,  rather  than  the 
"guess  at  it"  methods  of  the  past? 

"Modestly  submitted  for  the  benefit  of  somebody's  faithful  dog,  some- 
time,  somewhere." 

The  following  very  complete  and  exhaustive  article  on  Distemper  was 
written  especially  for  this  book  by  Dr.  George  W.  Clayton: 

Distemper. 

"History. — The  disease  now  known  as  canine  distemper  made  its  ap- 
pearance at  a  very  early  period.  According  to  Laosson,  it  was  known  at 
the  time  of  Aristotle,  and  the  epizootic  that  invaded  Bohemia  during  the 
year  1028  and  decimated  the  canine  species  of  that  country  is  now  known 
to  have  been  canine  distemper.  It  made  its  appearance  in  England  and 
on  the  Continent  of  Europe  during  the  Seventeenth  Century,  first  in  Spain, 
and  traveled  from  there  to  the  other  countries.  It  appeared  in  England 
and  France  about  1740,  in  Germany  in   1748,  in  Italy  about  1764,  and  in 




Russia  in  1770.  Distemper  now  exists  all  over  the  world  wherever  the  dog 
is  found.  From  the  time  of  its  first  appearance  it  has  been  considered  one 
of  the  most  fatal  diseases  to  which  the  dog  is  subject. 

"Definition. — Distemper  is  an  acute  contagious  disease,  caused  by  the 
introduction  of  a  specific  poison  into  the  system.  It  has  been  known  under 
various  names.  Opinions  differ  as  to  its  nature.  Some  authors  have  com- 
pared it  to  typhoid  or  typhus  in  man,  others  to  variola.  A  number  of  dif- 
ferent authors  describe  it  as  a  catarrhal  fever,  as  it  affects  all  the  mem- 
branes of  the  body.  The  nervous  system  is  generally  if  not  always  involved, 
and  there  is  also  a   characteristic  skin   eruption. 

"Causes. — That  a  germ  constitutes  the  exciting  cause  of  distemper  we 
are  convinced  by  recent  investigations.  Some  authorities  believe  there  may 
be  several  germs  or  different  forms  of  the  same  germ.  As  the  disease  is 
very  highly  contagious,  clearly  defined,  and  well  characterized,  the  exis- 
tence of  a  specific  germ  must  be  conceded.  According  to  this  theory 
the  spontaneous  origin  of  distemper  is  not  tenable,  and  that  the  disease 
may  be  perpetuated  and  continued  in  existence,  there  must  be  a  continued 
propagation  of  the  poison,  and  a  continual  transmission  of  this  poison. 

"The  poison  exists  in  the  air  in  a  fixed  and  volatile  state,  and  enters 
the  system  by  the  nose  and  mouth. 

"The  virus  can  be  communicated  from  one  animal  to  another,  and 
transmission  by  cohabitation  is  more  easily  effected  than  by  inoculation. 

"The  germ  has  great  vitality  and  great  power  of  resistance.  It  may 
undergo  dessication  in  the  air  and  still  retain  its  virulence.  It  can  exist 
a  long  time  outside  the  body  without  destruction,  and  communicate  the 
disease  when  brought  into  contact  with  susceptible  individuals. 

"It  has  been  found  that  the  virulent  properties  of  the  germs  are  not 
lost  in  any  degree  when  dried  at  a  normal  temperature,  or  when  exposed 
to  a  temperature  of  20  degrees  Centigrade,  but  does  lose  some  of  its  power 
if  preserved  in  a  dray  state  and  kept  for  any  length  of  time. 

"Under  proper  conditions  the  poison  of  distemper  can  reproduce  itself 
without  limit. 

"The  blood  of  the  affected  animal  has  been  found  to  be  contagious; 
also  the  secretions  from  the  eyes  and  nose. 

"Vaccination  of  young  animals  by  means  of  the  secretory  fluid  from 
animals  affected  with  the  disease  has  been  tried  and  has  produced  the  dis- 
ease artificially.  The  disease  when  produced  from  vaccination  generally 
runs  a  mild  course.  The  liability  of  dogs  to  contract  distemper  is  not  the 
same  at  all  ages,  and  under  all  circumstances  and  conditions.  Old  dogs 
have  a  greater  chance  of  escape,  this  being  more  a  disease  of  youth. 
Young  animals  generally  contract  the  disease  jn  the  course  of  their  first 
year.  Sometimes  whole  litters  of  puppies  being  carried  off  by  it.  Some 
animals  seem  to  possess  immunity  from  the  malady,  and  one  attack  suc- 
cessfully overcome  produces  immunity  from  another.  In  very  rare  cases 
there  are  exceptions  to  this  rule.  Distemper  is  found  in  all  localities,  and 
at  all  seasons,  in  the  country  it  may  be  more  rife  at  some  seasons  than 
others,  but  in  large  cities  it  exists  permanently. 

"Predisposing  Causes. — In  distemper,  as  in  all  similar  diseases,  there 
are  predisposing  causes.  Anything  that  weakens  the  constitution,  or  that 
tends  to  debilitate,  or  lessen  the  animal's  resisting  power  would  be  pre- 
disposing causes.  An  animal  that  has  a  weakened  constitution  inherited 
from  the  sire  or  dam,  from  any  cause,  for  instance  from  in-breeding,  in- 
judicious mating,  or  from  diseased  parents.  We  will  say,  then,  that  age, 
environment,  condition  of  the  constitution  at  the  time  of  exposure,  indi- 
viduality, etc:,  are  all  important.  The  sudden  alteration  in  the  environ- 
ment, like  a  change  of  weather,  or  of  feeding,  exposure  to  damp  and  cold, 
exhaustion,  a  long  journey,  the  exciting  and  unnatural  conditions  of  shows 
generally,  with  the  crowding  together  of  large  numbers  of  dogs  that  have 
lived  under  different  conditions,  etc.,  badly  drained,  ill-ventilated  kennels 
with  insufficient  disinfecting  and  feeding,  poor  food  or  over  feeding,  and 
too  little  exercise,  are  all  favorable  to  the  spread  of  the  disease. 

"Animals  Affected — Distemper  is  found  in  the  dog,  cat,  fox,  wolf, 
hyena,  prairie  dog  and  monkey. 

"Clinical  Symptoms. — Symptoms  of  canine  distemper  are  manifold  and 
rather  complicated.  They  involve  the  ocular,  respiratory  and  digestive  mu- 
cous membranes;  also  the  nervous  system  and  outer  integument  of  skin. 
For  the  purpose  of  description  we  will  divide  them  under  the  following 
different  heads: 

"Symptoms  of  Commencement. — The  period  of  incubation  is  usually 
from  four  to  fourteen  days.  Elevation  of  temperature  is  the  first  symptom 
noticeable  in  this  disease.  The  next  symptom  that  will  be  noticed  is  some 
disturbance  in  the  general  condition.  The  animal  will  seem  to  be  chilly 
and  have  shivering  spells,  the  nose  is  hot  and  dry,  the  skin  is  hard  and 
the  hair  becomes  harsh  and  dry.  The  animal  loses  his  appetite,  is  restless 
and  seems  depressed,  and  soon  tires  on  slight  exertion.  Vomiting  may 
occur. 

"Symptom  on  the  Outer  Integument. — There  is  sometimes  a  charac- 
teristic skin  eruption  in  distemper.  The  eruption  generally  occurs  on  the 
inner  facia  of  the  thighs,  and  on  the  abdomen,  or  it  may  cover  the  whole 
body.  It  first  appears  as  small  red  spots,  generally  scattered.  Sometimes, 
but  very  rarely,  they  are  confluent,  then  there  is  a  change  and  they  appear 
as  small  blisters  filled  with  serum,  and  later  on  this  changes  to  pus.  They 
are  about  the  size  of  a  small  bean,  then  dry  up  very  soon  and  form  yellow- 
ish scabs  and  crusts.  These  scabs  fall  off  and  leave  a  red,  circular  spot  on 
the  skin,  and  these  spots  are  some  time  in  disappearing.  Sometimes  pit 
and  ulcerations  are  formed,  on  account  of  the  dog  scratching  these  spots. 
Occasionally  this  trouble  is  only  slight  and  confined  to  parts  of  the  body, 
but  at  times  it  extends  over  the  whole  surface  of  th«  bodr.     When   the 



trouble  is  very  extensive  there  is  a  fetid  odor  given  off  from  the  body,  the 
hair  falling  off  in  places.  Occasionally  a  slight  skin  eruption  is  the  only 
symptom  that  is  observed,  but  in  these  cases  the  disease  is  of  a  very  mild 
form. 

"Symptoms  Shown  by  the  Eyes. — In  the  majority  of  cases  there  is  a 
catarrhal  conjunctivitis.  The  eye  watery,  the  eyelids  injected,  the  con- 
junctiva is  red  and  swollen,  and  as  the  light  cause's  the  animal  pain  he 
seeks  the  dark.  At  first  the  exudate  is  serious,  later  on  it  becomes  mucous, 
and  still  later  on  it  becomes  purulent,  in  color  light  gray  or  yellowish.  This 
discharge  collects  in  the  corner  of  the  eye  or  runs  down  over  the  face, 
forms  yellowish  crusts  on  the  edges  of  the  eyelids,  and  very  frequently 
glues  the  lids  together  during  the  night.  Lesions  of  the  cornea  may  be 
caused  by  the  corrosive  action  of  the  secretion,  and  the  resulting  inflam- 
mation of  the  surrounding  membranes.  The  animal  scratching  and  rubbing 
the  parts  producing  further  injury.  Nutritive  troubles  which  follow  also 
assist.  There  is  at  first  a  slight  swelling  which  afterward  forms  an  ulcer- 
ation. After  this  process  has  ceased  and  healing  takes  place  there  is  left 
white  spots  or  dark  pigmentation  on»  the  cornea.  The  inflammation  may 
extend  when  the  whole  eye  becomes  acutely  inflamed  and  breaks  down. 
The  eye  symptom  accompanied  by  a  fever  is  sometimes  the  only  symptoms 
of  the  disease. 

"Respiratory  Symptoms. — There  is  usually  an  inflammation  of  the 
mucous  membrane  of  the  air  passages  of  a  catarrhal  nature.  We  have, 
first,  catarrh  of  the  nose,  marked  by  sneezing,  and  the  animal  will  rub 
or  wipe  his  nose  with  his. paws.  There  is  generally  an  increasing  discharge 
from  both  nostrils,  at  first  serous,  then  mucous,  and  later  on  purulent,  and 
generally  quite  an  odor  to  this  discharge.  There  is  a  sniffling  respiration. 
The  nose  sometimes  dry  and  cracked,  and  ulceration  covering  the  membranes 
of  the  nasal  fossa.  When  the  discharge  is  very  profuse  the  trouble  extends 
to  the  turbinated  bones  and  sinuses.  In  catarrh  of  the  larynx  we  have 
a  loud,  hoarse,  dry  cough,  which  causes  the  animal  a  great  deal  of  dis- 
comfort. Later  on  it  becomes  moist  and  looser,  and  there  is  usually  a 
discharge.  On  account  of  reflex  action  this  cough  sometimes  produces  vom- 
iting. There  is  not  much  difficulty  in  respiration  when  the  larynx  alone 
is  affected,  but  when  the  bronchial  tubes  become  involved  and  the  inflam- 
mation extends  downward  and  produces  bronchitis,  there  is  a  very  great 
increase  in  respiration,  and  a  very  painful,  distressing  cough. 

"Symptoms  of  the  Digestive  Tract. — In  catarrh  of  the  stomach,  which 
occurs  in  this  disease,  there  is  generally  complete  loss  of  appetite,  and  the 
animal  vomits  a  frothy  liquid.  There  is  a  fetid  diarrhea,  or  infrequent 
defecation  and  intense  thirst.  The  discharge  from  the  bowels  is  of  a 
liquid  consistency,  generally  muco-purulent,  and  may  be  streaked  with 
blood,  while  the  abdomen  will  be  found  to  be  very  painful  on  pressure. 

"Nervous  Symptoms. — The  animal's  senses  are  very  dull  and  he  seems 
much  depressed.  There  may  be  deep  coma,  or  periods  of  excitement  occur, 
nervousness  and  delirium;  these  periods  generally  short,  terminating  in 
depression.  There  may  be  twitching  of  the  muscles,  especially  of  the 
head  and  limbs.  At  times  there  is  twitching  of  the  muscles  of  the  lower 
jaw  that  causes  the  saliva  to  foam;  again  there  will  be  only  a  chatter- 
ing of  the  teeth.  The  animal  will  wander  without  aim,  or  run  around 
as  if  lost.  A  haggard  appearance  of  the  eyes,  the  head  thrown  backward, 
the  animal  perhaps  having  convulsions.  There  may  be  motor  paralysis, 
the  animal  unsteady  in  its  actions,  may  drag  his  legs  or  there  may  be 
loss  of  power  in  the  posterior  extremities,  the  animal  being  unable  to  stand. 
There  is  sometimes  loss  of  control  of  the  bladder  and  lower  bowel,  when 
the  urine  and  feces  are  involuntarily  evacuated.  When  an  animal  is  in 
a  poor  state  of  health,  being  aenemic  and  in  a  generally  run  down  condi- 
tion, he  is  generally  attacked  with  very  severe  nervous  symptoms.  Serious 
weakness  of  the  heart  may  occur.  Some  constitutions  seem  to  succumb 
easily,  while  others  seem  to  withstand  more  acute  attacks. 

"Complications. — Gome   of   the  complications  that   occur  in   distemper 




are  capilliary  bronchitis,   pneumonia,   diarrhea,     jaundice,      paralysis,  and 
worst  of  all,  chorea. 

"Diagnosis. — When  the  animal  is  dull,  has  a  poor  appetite,  and  loses 
flesh  rapidly,  the  disease  should  be  suspected,  especially  if  there  has  been 
exposure  to  the  disease.  The  harsh  dry  cough  is  characteristic,  and  the 
eye  symptoms  when  accompanied  by  fever  are  diagnostic  of  this  disease. 
The  thermometer  should  be  used  in  these  cases. 

"Prognosis, — The  prognosis  of  distemper  we  regard  as  favorable  if 
the  case  is  seen  early  and  properly  treated.  The  danger  increases  with 
the  severity  of  the  symptoms  at  the  onset  of  the  disease.  A  persistent 
high  temperature,  or  a  subnormal  temperature  are  both  serious  symptoms. 
The  following  are  unfavorable  occurrences:  Much  emaciation  and  the 
animal  refuses  food,  or  when  there  are  grave  complications  such  as  pneu- 
monia, etc.,  or  when  the  animal  is  very  young  or  weak,  and  senemic,  or 
when  the  disease  attacks  different  organs  at  the  same  time.  Death  may 
occur  from  paralysis  of  the  brain  or  oedema  of  the  lungs,  from  septicaemia 
or  from  general  exhaustion.  Among  the  favorable  circumstances  are  the 
mature  age  of  the  patient,  good  constitution  of  the  animal,  mildness  of 
the  attack,  and  when  the  disease  is  confined  to  circumscribed  regions,  or 
to  one  organ  of  the  body. 

"Prophylaxis. — Due  attention  to  hygienics  is  one  of  the  most  impor- 
tant considerations.  It  is  a  good  plan  to  have  a  small  kennel  or  room 
where  there  will  be  plenty  of  fresh  air  without  draught  into  which  cases 
of  suspected  distemper  may  be  put  under  observation,  housing  all  distem- 
per cases  during  the  whole  course  of  the  illness  in  a  separate  kennel  or 
room.  Everything  that  has  been  about  the  animal  and  all  quarters  where 
the  animal  has  been  should  be  burned  if  possible.  If  it  is  not  desirable  to 
burn  the  quarters  there  should  be  a  thorough  disinfecting  of  them,  and 
especially  all  bedding  burned.  All  utensils  that  have  been  used  in  con- 
nection with  the  case,  such  as  feeding  and  drinking  pans,  should  be  thor- 
oughly disinfected.  A  dog  with  distemper  should  not  be  allowed  to  mingle 
with  others,  however  well  he  may  seem,  so  long  as  he  has  any  discharge 
from  eyes  or  nose,  and  never  before  from  four  to  eight  weeks  have  elapsed. 
Then,  after  the  nose  and  eyes  have  been  especially  disinfected  by  washing 
or  injecting  a  suitable  solution,  the  animal  should  be  washed  all  over,  the 
water  being  medicated  with  Clayton's  Ceoline  Dog  Wash,  Sanitas,  or  the 
Standard  Disinfectant.  As  an  animal  in  a  run-down,  debilitated  condi- 
tion will  contract  distemper  more  easily  than  one  in  perfect  health,  it  is 
essential  that  the  animal  be  kept  in  as  perfect  health  as  possible.  As  all 
dogs  are  subject  to  constipation,  especially  if  confined  in  the  house,  his 
bowels  should  be  seen  to  and  kept  open,  and  there  is  nothing  so  good  for 
this   purpose   as    Clayton's   Laxative   Pills. 

"Pathological  Anatomy. — Lesions  of  the  respiratory  tract  are  as  fol- 
lows: The  pituitary  membrane  or  lining  membrane  of  the  nasal  fossa  is 
injected,  infiltrated  and  covered  with  a  muco-purulent  exudate;  numerous 
eccymosecl  spots  are  found  on  the  membrane.  The  mucous  membrane  of 
the  larynx,  trachea  and  bronchi  shows  various  inflammatory  alterations. 
The  large  bronchi  are  filled  with  bloody  mucous,  the  smaller  filled  with 
a  thick,  tenacious  exudate.  The  pleura  is  covered  with  a  rose  or  citron 
colored  exudate.  The  bronchial  lymphatics  are  infiltrated,  tumefied,  and 
in  rare  cases  purulent.  The  surface  of  the  lungs  are  covered  with  red 
spots  and  the  lungs  are  collapsed  or  distended  with  air.  Lesions  of  the 
digestive  tract  are  as  follows:  The  mucous  membrane  of  the  small  intes- 
tines is  red,  and  numerous  eccymosed  spots  are  found,  also  hemorrhages 
in  the  subucous  tissue.  Occasionally  the  contents  of  the  intestines  are 
found   to  be  bloody. 

"In  the  brain  there  are  the  alterations  of  the  cerebral  oedema,  the 
nervous  substance  is  soft,  the  convoltions  are  flattened.  There  is  an  exu- 
date of  a  serious  character  in  the  lateral  ventricles  and  dilation  of  the 
blood  vessels  of  the  brain.  We  also  have  found  evidences  of  fatty  degenera- 
tion of  the  heart,  liver,  kidneys  and  an  abnormal  swelling  of  the  lymphatic 
gin  nds. 




"Treatment. — The  treatment  of  distemper  is  principally  symptomatic. 
We  have,  however,  a  remedy  that  is  capable  of  destroying  the  contagious 
germ.  Our  researches  have  established  the  fact  that  Clayton's  Distem- 
perine  and  Distemperine  Tablets  enables  us  to  combat  the  disease  suc- 
cessfully. As  soon  as  symptoms  of  distemper  are  observed,  careful  at- 
tention to  all  hygienic  conditions  should  be  given  immediately.  There 
should  be  comfortable,  well-ventilated  quarters  furnished  for  the  animal, 
and  more  especially  there  should  be  plenty  of  fresh  air,  but  no  draught. 
These  quarters  should  be  thoroughly  disinfected  (See  Clayton's  Ceoline 
Dog  Wash),  with  changes  of  bedding  daily.  The  administration  of  Clay- 
ton's Distemperine  or  Clayton's  Distemperine  Tablets  should  be  commenced 
at  once  and  given  according  to  directions.  The  discharge  from  the  nose 
and  eyes  should  be  looked  after  and  removed  several  times  daily,  or  as 
often  as  it  collects.  The  eyes  should  be  bathed  with  warm  water  often, 
as  it  is  a  great  relief.  This  matter  is  too  often  neglected.  If  there  are 
occular  complications  Clayton's,  or  Eberhart's  'No.  2*  Eye  Lotion  should 
be  applied  to  prevent  those  serious  lesions  that  so  often  occur  in  this  dis- 
ease. If  there  are  skin  manifectations  Clayton's,  or  Eberhart's  Mange  or 
Skin  Cure  should  be  applied  carefully,  and  will  not  disturb  the  animal.- 
The  skin  eruption  sometimes  causes  the  animal  much  distress.  In  cases 
where  the  disease  is  localized  in  the  organs  of  digestion,  very  careful  at- 
tention should  be  given  to  the  ailment.  Careful  nursing  and  feeding  are 
of  the  utmost  importance.  The  dog's  strength  must  be  looked  after 
and  a  highly  nutritious,  easily  digested  diet  given.  Chopped  raw  beef  is 
often  taken  when  all  else  is  refused,  sheep's  head  broth  with  oatmeal  or 
rice  is  very  good..  If  the  animal  is  very  weak,  beef  tea,  raw  eggs  and  port 
wine  should  be  given  often  but  in  small  quantities.  If  food  is  refused 
enough  nourishment  must  be  forced  down  him  to  sustain  life.  Should  the 
stomach  refuse  to  retain  the  food  he  may  be  fed  per  enema.  Strong  purga- 
tives are  to  be  avoided  in  this  disease.  Exercise  is  injurious,  the  animal 
should  be  kept  quiet. 

"When  the  animal  is  convalescent  his  system  should  be  built  up,  and 
cod  liver  oil  is  valuable  in  these  cases,  while  Clayton's  Condition  Pills 
with  pepsin  give  remarkably  good  results." 

The  following  valuable  article  on  Distemper  was  published  in  Field 
and  Fancy  and  written  by  F.  J.  Skinner,  the  editor.  We  cannot  get  too 
much   knowledge   on  this   disease: 

"As  soon  as  the  disease  makes  its  appearance  the  affected  animal 
should  be  placed  in  specially  prepared  quarters,  which  are  dry  and  well 
ventilated,  but  free  from  drafts  and  not  liable  to  great  changes  in  tem- 
perature. Unless  the  weather  is  warm  abundant  bedding  of  wheat  straw 
should  be  supplied,  and  the  patient  made  as  comfortable  as  possible.  Dis- 
infectants should  be  in   constant   use. 

"The  bedding  should  be  changed  at  least  once  each  day,  and  oftener, 
if  the  patient  is  greatly  prostrated  and  unable  to  move  about.  It  is  also 
best  to  slightly  darken  the  quarters  so  that  the  patient  may  not  be  dis- 
turbed by  the  light  or  the  flies,  which  are  apt  to  congregate  about  him. 

"As  the  disease  progresses  it  is  probable  that  the  dog's  appetite  will 
fail,  and  while  at  first  he  may  eat  sparingly  of  finely  chopped  meat,  broth 
thickened  with  rice,,  or  toasted  bread  or  slightly  heated  milk,  the  time  may 
come  when  he  will  have  to  be  urged  or  compelled   to  partake  of  food. 

"When  the  stomach  is  decidedly  weak,  beef  tea,  raw  eggs  and  milk 
to  which  lime  water  has  been  added  must  be  depended  upon.  When  hand 
feeding  must  be  resorted  to  it  is  well  to  remember  that  the  continued 
forcing  of  food  upon  the  patient  will  disturb  and  excite  and  overcome  the 
good   effects   which   might   result   from   the   administration   of   food. 

"Raw  eggs  are  easily  fed,  as  it  is  only  necessary  to  break  off  the 
ends  of  the  shell,  open  the  dog's  mouth  with  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand, 
and  withdrawing  the  tongue  somewhat  with  one  or  two  fingers  of  the  right 
hand  allow  the  contents  of  the  egg  to  run  down  his  throat.  If  he  refuses 
to  swallow  relaxing  the  tongue  will   usually  have  the  desired   effect. 

"Where  great  debility  is  noted  it  is  well  to  accompany  the  eggs  with 


 

a  tablespoonful  of  sherry  wine,  or  if  exhaustion  is  very  great  he  may  be 
stimulated  by  the  same  quantity  of  brandy.  Unless  the  dog  takes  food 
without  forcing,  two  eggs  morning  and  evening,  together  with  a  little 
lean  chopped  beef,  milk  or  broth  in  the  middle  of  the  day  should  be  suffi- 
cient. By  avoiding  continual  disturbance  of  the  sufferer  he  will  progress 
much  better  than  if  subjected  to  undue  attention. 

"His  temperature  must  not  be  allowed  to  get  too  high.  To  guard 
against  this  and  other  things  throughout  his  ordeal  until  the  appetite  re- 
turns, he  should  have  strict  attention  throughout.  It  is  well,  too,  to  have 
listerine  in  a  small  jam  pot  with  a  scrap  of  sponge  changed  twice  a  day, 
with  which  to  wash  the  mouth,  eyes  and  nose,  and  the  discharge  from  the 
latter  can  be  much  lessened,  relieved  and  finally  dried  up  by  the  admin- 
istration of  powdered  camphor  in  the  form  of  snuff. 

"Also  the  bowels  must  be  watched,  opening  medicine  given  if  at  all 
costive,  and  on  recovery  the  patient  must  not  be  allowed  to  go  out  too  soon 
or  exert  himself  violently  unless  you  want  a  relapse.  Very  great  benefit 
will  be  derived  from  burning  a  cresoline  lamp,  placed  fairly  near  to  the 
patient  during  the  whole  illness.  It  acts  as  a  disinfectant,  is  good  for  the 
respiratory  organs,  and  generally  tends  to  the  curtailment,  occasionally  even 
the  prevention  of  the  malady. 

"The  fact  is  that  every  case  of  distemper  needs  to  be  treated  on  its 
own  merits,  according  to  the  symptoms  which  it  presents.  When  any  com- 
bination of  symptoms  such  as  sickness,  diarrhoea,  or  cough,  or  fits  present 
itself,  it  must  be  dealt  with  in  the  order  of  severity — that  is  to  say,  the 
most  distressing  symptoms  must  be  taken  first,  and. have  particular  atten- 
tion paid  to  it,  while  the  less  serious  symptoms  can  be  dealt  with  as  oppor- 
tunity offers. 

"There  are,  however,  certain  points  connected  with  the  treatment  of 
distemper  which  apply  to  all  cases  alike.  One  of  the  most  important  of 
these  points  has  reference  to  diet.  When,  by  the  aid  of  a  veterinary  clinical 
thermometer,  it  has  been  ascertained  that  a  dog  supposed  to  be  suffering 
from  distemper  is  in  a  feverish  condition,  it  becomes  important  that  no 
solid  food  whatever  should  be  given  until  the  fevered  condition  has  been 
reduced.     A  dog  must  be  kept  on  liquid  food,  such  as  gravy  and  milk. 

"Another  point  of  importance  in  all  cases  of  distemper  is  with  regard 
to  exercise.  The  greatest  care  chould  be  taken  not  to  allow  a  dog  to  con- 
tract a  chill,  and  it  should  only  be  exercised  if  the  weather  be  perfectly 
fine  and  dry,  and  not  even  then  if  there  is  much  feverishness.  Where 
valuable  dogs  are  concerned,  the  owners  must  attend  to  all  these  matters, 
and  treat  patients  with  as  much  care  as  a  human  patient  requires,  because 
the  more  highly  bred  a  dog  is,  as  a  rule,  the  more  delicate  he  will  be,  and 
a  greater  difficulty  there  will  be  to  get  him  safely  through  a  severe  attack 
of  distemper. 

"Many  dogs  when  suffering  from  distemper  have  a  disposition  more 
or  less  pronounced  to  roughness  of  the  skin,  and  in  many  cases  absolutely 
to  eczema.  The  eczematous  eruption  which  so  often  appears  during  dis- 
temper is  liable  to  be  mistaken  for  mange,  because  it  usually  appears  as  an 
eruption  of  small  pustules  filled  with  a  watery  fluid,  which  discharges  and 
makes  the  animal's  coat  very  unpleasant.  It  may  also  be  said  at  the  out- 
set that  the  appearance  of  an  eruption  during  distemper  should  always  be 
regarded  with  satisfaction,  inasmuch  as  that  is,  practically  speaking,  na- 
ture's way  of  throwing  off  the  ill  humors  with  which  the  body  is  charged. 
The  efforts  of  the  owner  of  a  dog  which  is  suffering  in  this  way  should  be 
directed  rather  to  modifying  the  severity  of  the  skin  trouble,  and  of  giving 
the  dog  comfort  while  that  lasts,  than  checking  it.  It  is  a  dangerous  thing 
to  try  to  drive  back,  as  it  were,  an  outbreaking  complaint  into  the  sys- 
tem. It  is  far  better  to  let  it  run  its  course,  subject  to  a  local  alleviative 
treatment. 

"During  the  time  that  a  dog  is  suffering  from  distemper,  it  is  well 
to  watch  carefully  for  any  symptoms  of  paralysis,  which  would  be  indicated 
by  twitching  of  the  muscles  and  sometimes  by  a  fit.  There  are  a  great  many 
Of  these  cases  nowadays — more  than  there  used  to  be  by  far.     Skin  disease 




ii  should  be  regarded  as  kind  of  a  safety  valve,  for  dogs  that  suffer  from  skin 
complaint  rarely,  if  ever,  develop  paralysis  or  chorea. 

The  following  valuable  article  was  taken  from  Field  and  Fancy: 

After  -Effects  of  Distemper — Distemper  in  itself  is  not  so  serious  a 
matter  as  are  the  troubles  which  follow  in  its  wake.  The  most  deadly  of 
these  is  the  complaint  known  as  chorea,  or  paralysis,  sometimes  called 
"twitch,"  which  is  an  involuntary  jerking  of  the  nerves,  affecting  sometimes 
the  head,  sometimes  the  legs,  sometimes  the  whole  body.  It  usually  comes 
about  in  this  way:  A  dog  has  distemper,  and,  as  the  owner  believes,  has 
it  very  mildly;  he  merely  shows  signs  of  a  little  cold,  or  perhaps  he  is  merely 
"off  color,"  as  the  expression  is,  loses  his  appetite  and  seems  not  to  be 
himself  for  a  few  days,  no  other  symptoms  in  particular  making  their  ap- 
pearance. 

After  a  few  days  he  is  better,  and  the  owner  thinks  he  has  had  dis- 
temper and  is  getting  over  it,  and  nothing  more  is  thought  of  the  matter 
until  a  little  later  on — probably  after  the  lapse  of  week  or  two — he  has  a 
fit,  and  on  recovering  from  the  fit  it  is  found  that  he  is  twitching  all  over. 
This  is  not  always  what  happens.  In  many  cases  the  first  symptoms  of  any- 
thig  wrong  takes  the  form  of  this  involuntary  twitching  of  the  muscles; 
bpt  the  disease  is  very  insidious  and  comes  on  in  various  ways,  although  it 
seems  to  be  almost  entirely  connected  with  distemper,  and  the  moral  to 
be  learned  from  this,  therefore,  is  that  any  case  of  distemper,  however  mild, 
should  be  treated  as  seriously  as  if  it  were  a  bad  attach,  because  this  chorea 
or  paralysis  ought  almost  to  be  described  as  a  sort  of  suppressed  distemper, 
which,  if  the  case  is  thoroughly  treated,  is  brought  out  of  the  system  instead 
of  being  allowed  to  lie  dormant  there  until  it  affects  the  brain  and  causes 
the  distressing  symptoms  of  twitching,  which  in  many  cases  last  till  the 
end  of  the  dog's  life. 

With  regard  to  carelessness  in  dealing  with  dogs  which  are  convales- 
cent. The  most  dangerous  cases  of  distemper,  apart  from  those  in  which 
there  has  been  chorea  or  paralysis,  are  the  cases  in  which  the  liver  is  very 
seriously  affected.  Jaundice,  as  every  one  knowrs  who  has  had  experience 
with  it,  is  a  very  bad  complaint,  and  it  carries  off  a  good  many  dogs.  It 
very  often  occurs  in  combination  with  distemper,  and  when  a  dog  which  has 
been  suffering  in  that  way  with  a  combination  of  distemper  and  liver  com- 
plaint has  taken  a  turn  for  the  better  great  care  will  be  needed  for  some 
time. 