AT  LAST!  The  crowning  and  final  effort  of  my  life — 
for  dogs — is  accomplished,  and  this  third  and  final  edition 
of  "EVERYTHING  ABOUT  DOGS"   is   out. 

Many  days  and  nights  'till  the  clock  would  strike  up  to  three  in  the 
morning,  have  I  sat  at  my  desk  and  written,  handicapped  by  my  eyes,  (one 
of  them  having  been  operated  on  and  a  cataract  removed),  and  when  1 
started  this  book  I  was  afraid  the  strain  on  them  would  be  more  than  they 
could  stand,  but  took  the  chance,  for  I  felt  it  was  my  duty  to  dogs,  because 
I  knew  how  much  good  it  would  do  dogs,  to  get  to  the  dog  owners  of  this 
country  what  is  in  this  book,  and  my  reward  for  all  this  labor  of  love  is 
ever  present  within  me,  and  I  am  now  fully  repaid,  aside  from  the  profit 
consideration  part  of  it  in  dollars,  and  this  part  not  so  great  as  it  should 
have  been,  due  to  the  inflated  cost  of  paper  and  everything  else  pertaining 
to  attempting  to  get  out  a  book  in  war  times,  but  I  never  started  to  do 
anything  and  changed  my  mind,  or  failed  to  get  through  with  it.  I've  had 
human  friends  "change  their  minds" — and  fail  me — in  time  of  need,  but 
never  a  dog — and  this  is  another  "difference"  between  a  man  and  a  dog. 
The  word  "man"  used  here,  applies  to  both  sexes  in  humans — as  I  have 
found  it,  even  if  the  women  are  now  voting  in  several  states.  I  want  to 
say,  before  going  any  further,  that  I  am  not  writing  through  any  spirit  of 
egotism  or  self-flattery,  not  "throwing  bouquets  at  myself" — (never  could 
stand  for  this  in  anyone),  and  I  hope  you  will  not  misjudge  me  as  to  this, 
for  I've  been  truthful  and  honest  all  my  life,  and  will  keep  it  up  this  way. 
There  never  was  another  "dog  book"  just  like  this — others  may  be  larger, 
more  pretentious,  the  language  used  of  a  higher  grade — and  all  that,  but 
this  book  is  what  I  believe,  and  feel,  will  accomplish  its  ami— to  do  good 
to  dogs — and  that's  what  I  wrote  it  for.  There  is  so  much  in  the  book 
that  is  good  (not  all  my  own  real  knowledge),  but  this  book  means,  and  isr^— 


the  best  knowledge  that  could  be  gathered  together,  from  my  experience  of 
all  my  life  in  dogs,  and  of  others,  more  wise  than  I. 

It  has  all  been  done  for  dogs,  my  love  for  dogs,  my  earnest  and  upper- 
most desire  through  all  the  many  years  of  my  life — do  good  to  dogs,  and  1 
have  been  hunting  for — saving  up — trying  and  digesting  carefully,  every- 
thing herein,  so  as  to  feel  reasonably  sure  it  was  good  for  dogs,  and  the 
book  is  put  out  with  a  most  comfortable  feeling  that  it  will  do  a  mighty 
lot  of  good  to  dogs.  Humans  may  "bite"  you,  (watch  out  for  that  bite, 
for  I  know),  but  never  will  your  dog  bite  you — and  harm  you.  Often 
bitten  by  dogs  I  have  been,  but  the  dog  did  not  know  he  was  biting  his 
best  friend,  but  the  humans  who  did  "bite"  me — they  knew. 

My  father  was  a  minister  for  forty  years,  and  I  used  to  have  the  idea 
that  I  would  get  into  Heaven  on  the  "family  ticket,"  but  I  now  believe, 
that  should  I  fail  on  this,  that  what  I've  done  for  dogs  will  pass  me  in — 
(or  ought  to) — anyhow,  I've  two  chances.  I  made  my  will  not  long  ago, 
and  in  it  a  provision  as  to  a  home  for  each  of  the  dogs  in  the  kennel  when 
I  am  called  away,  (you  should  do  the  same),  and  when  it's  time  to  go  to  the 
mysterious  beyond,  about  the  last  comforting  feeling  will  be,  that  my  loved 
dogs  will  be  cared  for  nearly  as  well  as  I  have  done  for  them. 

In  a  preface  to  a  former  edition  I  said  to  own  a  thoroughbred  dog, 
so  as  not  to  have  to  apologise  to  your  friends  when  they  saw  your  dog, 
but  I  want  to  change  this  now — to,  own  a  dog — any  kind  of  a  dog,  even  if 
not  pedigreed — just  so  it's  a  dog — so  you  can  make  that  one  dog  happy.  My 
heart  aches,  often,  when  I  see  a  poor  homeless  cur  on  the  streets,  hungry 
and  thirsty — and  if  it  were  possible,  I  would  take  that  dog  home — but  there 
is  a  limit  to  everything.  That  night,  after  in  bed,  I  lay  awake,  thinking  of 
that  poor,  homeless  dog  I  met  on  the  street  in  the  city  today. 

By  this  time  many  who  read  this  will  have  decided  that  I  am  a 
"krank" — so  I  am — as  to  dogs —  and  proud  of  it.  The  "curs"  you  see  on 
the  streets,  homeless  and  friendless,  are  to  be  blamed  for,  because  of  the 
owners  of  female  dogs,  that  were  not  kept  up,  but  were  allowed  to  run 
loose  on  the  street  when  in  season,  (but  should  have  been),  and  here  is 
where  the  mongrels  come  from.  There  ought  to  be  a  law  in  every  state 
that  when  a  female  is  in  season,  she  must  be  kept  confined  till  over  it,  or, 
a  penalty  of  a  fine  of  twenty-five  dollars,  for  here  is  where  these  "curs" 
come  from.  If  you  see  or  meet  one  of  these  poor  "unfortunates,"  if  you 
can't  give  him  a  home  yourself,  try  to  get  some  friend  to  take  the  dog  and 
give  it  the  home  any  and  every  dog  deserves. 

Twenty-two  thousand  of  my  former  two  editions  of  this  book  were  sold, 
a  wonderful  record,  beating  the  combined  sales  of  all  the  other  dog  books 
ever  published,  and  I  only  wish  it  were  possible  to  publish  the  thousands  of 
letters  I  have  received  unsolicited — for  they  have  made  my  heart  glad — 
often — when  it  needed  it  too. 


You  can't  do  too  much  for  dogs,  and  all  you  do  for  them  they  will  re- 
pay you  a  hundred  fold. 

When  you  get  a  dog,  arrange  to  care  for  it  properly;  provide  a  suitable 
place  for  it  to  live  and  sleep,  and  especially  see  to  it  that  your  dog  gets 
plenty  of  exercise,  which  is  as  essentially  necessary  as  food  and  water  to 
keep  it  in  health. 

When  you  take  your  dog  for  a  walk,  teach  him  to  mind  you;  if  he 
runs  too  far  ahead,  call  him  back,  and  never  allow  him  to  cross  over  the 
street  ahead  of  you,  as  any  dog  is  liable  to  do  should  he  see  another  dog  on 
the  other  side.  A  dog's  judgment  is  faulty  as  to  how  quick  he  can  get  over  . 
In  front  of  a  car  coming,  and  when  he  sees  the  other  dog  he  forgets  all 
this  and  doesn't  see  or  hear  the  electric  car  or  auto  that  is  rapidly  coming  up 
or  down  the  street.  Many  a  dog  has  been  killed  this  way,  even  when  out 
with  his  master  or  mistress,  because  they  were  not  watching  out  for  their 
dog.  When  you  come  to  a  street  crossing,  look  and  see  if  any  car  is  coming; 
stop  a  second,  see  that  your  dog  is  behind  you  and  that  it  stops;  then,  if 
the  coast  is  clear  say  "All  right,  come  on,  Jack!"  Your  dog  can  soon  be 
taught  to  follow  and  mind  you.  The  writer  has  for  years  past  taken  out 
from  fifteen  to  twenty  dogs  at  a  time  every  afternoon  for  a  walk  on  the 
streets  of  Cincinnati,  and  all  under  such  control  that  by  the  crack  of  a  whip 
they  would  all  stop  at  a  crossing,  and  a  second  crack  and  say  "Go!"  over 
they  flew,  and  enjoyed  it,  too.  With  only  one  dog  for  a  walk  no  danger  need 
ever  befall  him  if  you  are  watching  out  for  him  as  you  should  do. 

If  your  dog  gets  into  the  bad  habit  of  running  and  barking  at  a  horse, 
bicycle  or  a  person,  break  him  of  this  at  once  by  calling  him  to  you  there 
and  then;  scold  him  and  switch  him  sharply  over  his  back — any  dog  can 
soon  be  broken  of  this  by  proper  punishment  at  the  time,  or  of  any  fault 
if  he  is  punished  and  knows  what  it  is  for.  Whipping  a  dog  after  the 
fault  does  no  good  and  is  only  an  unnecessary  infliction.  Whipping  is  not 
necessarily  cruelty  any  more  than  it  would  be  to  punish  your  child  when 
it  needed  it,  and  children  need  it  oftener  than  dogs  do.  Get  a  rawhide,  keep 
it  handy,  and  when  your  dog  needs  it  give  him  a  few  sharp  cuts  across  the 
rump  or  back,  which  will  smart  and  sting,  and  he'll  remember  it.  Never 
strike  him  over  the  head  or  kick  him,  which  is  brutal.  Don't  get  angry 
yourself,  keep  cool,  for  the  dog  can  notice  this  the  same  as  your  child  could, 
and  the  punishment  loses  its  effect.  Your  dog  loves  you  from  the  first  hour 
you  have  him,  and  he'll  love  you  none  the  less  for  a  deserved  punishment. 

Whipping  is  not  necessary  with  all  dogs,  scolding  answering  the  pur- 
pose in  many  cases.  Dogs  possess  so  much  intelligence  that  a  good  scolding, 
especially  in  older  ones,  will  do  just  as  well,  and  I  consider  it  preferable. 
I  have  dogs  now  that  act  heart-broken  when  I  scold  them  and  continue  so 
till  I  again  talk  to  them  and  "make  up"  by  saying,  "Don't  you  know,  Jack, 
that  you  were  a  very  bad  dog?"  and.  "Now  if  you'll  be  good  I'll  forgive  you, 


but  you  mustn't  do  so  any  more."     Then  see  how  happy  Jack  is  and  how  he'll 
jump  all  over  you  for  joy. 

You  can  reason  with  all  dogs.  The  "punishment  should  fit  the  crime," 
and  therefore  use  judgment.  When  your  dog  deserves  praise,  don't  be 
stingy  about  giving  it,  but  talk  to  him;  he'll  understand  your  words  and 
oaresses,  and  by  his  actions,  the  loving  looks  from  his  eyes  and  the  wag  of 
his  tail,  he'll  show  you  how  much  he  appreciates  it. 

As  to  giving  sulphur  to  dogs,  this  is  an  old  tradition  handed  down 
from  no  one  knows  where,  and  here  is  where  many  dog  owners  make  a 
mistake.  If  your  dog  gets  sick  your  neighbor  will  say:  "Oh,  give  it  some 
sulphur."  Whoever  invented  this  idea  knew  very  little  about  dogs.  Sul- 
phur in  its  place  is  all  right,  but  a  continual  use  of  it  to  excess  thins  the 
blood,  weakens  the  dog,  and  does  harm  far  more  than  good.  Many  a  poor 
dog  has  been  overdosed  with  sulphur  when  it  did  not  need  it  at  all.  I've 
heard  of  people  keeping  a  lump  of  sulphur  in  the  dog's  drinking  pan,  and 
in  this  case  it  did  no  harm  nor  any  good,  for  you  can  leave  a  lump  of  it 
in  water  for  ten  years  and  the  dog  never  gets  any  of  it,  because  sulphur  and 
water  do  not  mix,  and  it  only  serves  to  give  the  water  a  nasty  taste  in  the 
imagination  of  the  dog.  Sulphur  given  about  once  a  month  in  summer  is 
all  right  for  grown  dogs;  the  proper  dose  being  for  large  breeds,  a  good 
teaspoonful  of  flour  of  sulphur  smoothly  mixed  in  milk,  to  be  given  before 
breakfast;  an  even  teaspoonful  for  smaller  breeds.  It  can  also  be  given 
mixed  up  in  molasses,  which  will,  however,  act  more  quickly  as  a  physic. 

If  you  live  in  a  flat,  or  have  no  yard  so  the  dog  can  get  grass,  you  can 
plant  some  grass  seed  in  a  box  and  have  it  all  the  year  around  for  your  dog 
to  eat.  Get  the  seed  of  the  kind  of  grass  that  dogs  like — any  seed  store 
has  it — and  you  can  just  as  well  raise  and  keep  grass  for  your  dog  as  you 
can  raise  flowers  indoors.  Keep  box  sitting  on  floor  so  dog  can  go  to  it  when 
he  wants  to.     You  provide  the  grass,  and  he'll  do  the  rest. 

This  preface  or  introductory,  is  about  all  I  can  say — it  seems  to  me  it 
has  covered  the  subject,  but  read  all  the  rest  in  the  book,  under  the  several 
headings,  so  you  don't  miss  anything  of  all  the  good  things  this  book  con- 
tains. 

So  I'll  close,  by  dedicating  the  book  to  dogs,  and  their  owners. 

Faithfully  yours, 

AL.  G.  EBERHART. 