

BREEDING  AND  RAISING  OF  PUPPIES 


Bitches  come  in  season  on  an  average  of  twice  a  year,  about  every  five 
to  seven  months,  and  the  question  is  often  asked  whether  it  is  advisable 
to  bceed  a  bitch  during  the  first  period  of  oestrum.  The  answer  depends 
much  upon  the  breed  and  state  of  maturity.  As  a  general  thing,  it  is  not 
well  for  a  young  bitch,  which  can  not  be  fully  developed  at  the  age  of  ten 
months,  to  undergo  the  strain  on  vitality,  which  maternity  causes.  Some 
terriers  mature  quickly,  but  the  large  breeds  should  certainly  not  be  bred 
until  at  least  eighteen  months  old,  and  in  any  case  it  is  wise  to  allow  the 
first  period  to  pass. 

Another  question  asked,  is  whether  a  bitch  should  be  bred  at  every 
period,  or  rather,  whether  it  is  wise  to  do  so.  This  depends  a  good  deal 
upon  the  vigor  of  the  bitch,  but  unless  a  bitch  be  looked  upon  as  a  mere 
machine  to  produce  puppies  for  the  benefit  of  the  owner's  pocket,  it  is  well 
to  allow  the  bitch  to  be  served  every  other  period.  When  a  bitch  is  bred 
twice  a  year  and  has  a  litter  each  time,  the  strain  upon  her  vitality  must  be 
very  great,  and  unless  the  mother  is  more  than  ordinarily  vigorous,  later 
litters  will  show  a  corresponding  weakness. 

A  bitch  first  shows  signs  of  coming  in  season  by  bleeding.  Now,  if  you 
are  watching  for  her  and  take  note  of  the  clay  the  bleeding  begins,  then 
one  method  to  determine  when  she  is  ready  to  take  the  dog  is  to  count 
from  this  day,  and  from  the  tenth  to  twelfth  day  she  is  ready  for  the  dog. 
This  rule  does  not  always  work,  however,  for  I've  had  bitches  that  were  ready 
and  willing  to  be  served  even  in  the  sixth  day  and  yet  others  would  not  take 
the  dog  till  the  fifteenth  day.  Quite  a  good  plan  is  to  take  her  out  for  a 
walk  on  chain  when  you  think  she  is  about  ripe,  and  let  her  meet  the  first 
d  )£  she  sees,  or,  if  you  have  a  dog  on  your  place,  allow  her  near  this  dog 
for  a  minute,  and  if  she  would  accept  this  dog,  then  you  can  be  certain  that 
she  Is  ready  to  be  bred  and  take  her  to  the  dog  you  have  selected.  If  you 
try  this  plan,  be  careful  or  else  she  might  fool  you  and  get  served  by  this 
dr?  »he  had  met.     Dogs  are  quick  workers. 

After  a  visit  to  the  dog,  the  mother  will  carry  her  progeny  about  63 
or  64  days,  as  a  rule,  but  they  sometimes  whelp  a  few  days  sooner  or  later, 
and  you  need  not  be  alarmed  unless  they  go  by  from  five  days  to  a  week, 
when  very  likely  trouble  is  in  store  and  assistance  to  be  given,  or  better  yet, 
call  in  a  good  veterinarian.  I  have  had  bitches  whelp  a  week  ahead  of  time; 
such  cases  are  rare,  however,  and  have  raised  the  pups  by  extra  attention 
given  for  a  few  days  as  to  often  putting  the  pups  to  the  teats  to  nurse  if 
thay  did  not  get  there  themselves.  We  can  no  reckon  the  time  exactly.  Much 
depViVs  upon  the  health  and  strength,  and  even  mental  idiosyncrasy. 

The  best  time  for  the  visit  is  early  spring,  as  the  puppies  have  then 
all  the  long  summer  before  them  to  romp  and  get  strong  in. 

At  the  time  of  mating,  particularly,  exercise  should  be  well  regulated, 
and  must  be  insisted  on.  Whilst  at  this  period  exercise  is  essential,  ex- 
haustive work  would  be  detrimental.  The  amount  of  exercise  should  de- 
pend on  the  individual,  a  gross  and  lusty  bitch  needs  plenty  of  freedom, 
while  one  the  reverse  would  need  less  exercise,  in  proportion  to  her  physical 
strength. 

For  a  couple  weeks  before  bitch  is  due  to  whelp,  she  must  have  a  daily 
walk  up  to  within  a  day  or  so  of  the  time  due,  but  this  must  be  gentle  as 
she  is  very  heavy. 

tp  have  a  goed  litter  of  puppies,  a  bitch  must  not  onky  possess  blood 
free  from  all  taint  of  disease,  but  she  must  be  strong  and  in  good  condition 
about  the  time  of  oestrum,  or  heat. 

If  you  have  in  any  way  neglected  her,  or  if,  through  circumstances 
over  which  you  have  probably  had  no  control,  she  has  fallen  off  a  bit,  begin 
to  get  her  in  form  three  months  before  the  time  of  her  coming  on.  It  will 
pay  you  to  do  so. 

The  following  as  to  giving  the  bitch  some  medicine  to  open  her  bowels 
I  found  in  Field  and  Fancy,  but  who  written  by  I  do  not  know: 

"Some  there  are  who  deem  it  wrong  to  give  a  mild  cathartic  Imme- 
diately before  the  time  of  whelping.  A  violent  purge  is  certainly  to  be  de- 
precated, but  it  is  the  firm  opinion  of  the  writer  that  the  bitch  is  mater- 
ially helped  and  benefited  by  a  little  opening  medicine.  At  any  rate,  that 
course  is  invariably  followed  by  the  most  successful  accouchers  among 
women,  and  it  must  be  obvious  to  the  merest  novice  that  when  the  system 
is  greatly  upset,  or  about  to  undergo  a  severe  ordeal,  the  condition  of  the 
stomach  and  bowels  is  of  the  highest  importance.  A  moderate  dos«J  of 
castor  oil,  say  a  dessertspoonful  for  a  30-lb.  dog,  or  even  some  sweet  olive 
oil,  will  do  all  that  is  required  without  inducing  excessive  straining.  Such 
has  been  my  custom  for  a  good  many  years,  and  events  have  proved  its 
value." 

My  plan  is  to  watch  the  passages  of  bitch  just  before  she  whelps,  and 
if  she  is  constipated,  to  then  give  her  a  mild  dose  of  castor  and  olive  oil. 

I  believe  when  a  bitch  is  just  ready,  that  one  service  is  sufficient,  and 
rarely  ever  allow  my  own  to  be  served  but  once,  but  to  -make  assurance 
doubly  sure,  a  second  service  after  an  interval  of  twenty-four-  hours,  would 
be  advisable.  If  you  are  sending  her  away  to  some  kennel  to  be  bred,  ship 
her  not  later  than  the  eighth  day. 

It  would  be  as  well  if  you  could  go  with  your  favorite  instead  of  send- 
ing her,  but  most,  if  not  all,  good  breeders  are  not  only  gentlemen,  but  lovers 
of  dogs  and  will  take  the  greatest  care  of  the  bitch. 

The  length  of  time  of  a  bitch  being  in  season  is  from  fifteen  to  twenty 
days  as  a  rule,  but  there  are  exceptions  to  this.  If  a  bitch  is  served  late  in 
season,  the  service  generally  prolongs  the  season  or  period  in  which  she 
would  willingly  accept  the  dog.  A  very  fat  bitch  should  never  be  bred, 
as  in  so  doing  you  are  liable  to  lose  not  only  the  pups,  but  the  bitch  her- 
self. After  the  mating,  the  bitch  should  be  kept  secluded  (no  food  or  water 
having  boen  given  her  directly  before),  nor  any  food  for  six  hours  after. 

Now,  for  the  next  two  months  the  bitch  must  require  every  attention. 
For  safety's  sake  she  should  be  kept  away  from  her  old  canine  friends  for 
about  a  week.  She  must  not,  however,  be  denied  exercise,  and.  all  through- 
out the  time  she  is  carrying  her  puppies  she  must  have  plenty  of  exercise  and 
fresh  air.  But  it  must  not  be  of  too  boisterous  a  character;  .and:. I  would  not 
permit  a  bitch  in  whelp  to  play  with  a  dog  of  her  own  size,  or  a  larger  dog, 
too  much.  A  collision  between  her  and  a  heavy  companion  might  be  very 
serious  indeed. 

If  your  bitch  is  a  house  pet  and  has  been  accustomed  to  jumping  upon 
chairs,  the  safest  plan  to  guard  against  accidents  is  to  tip  the  chairs  up 
against  the  wall  for  a  week  or  two  before  she  is  due  to  whelp — if  you  are 
yet  keeping  her  in  the  house.  When  very  heavy,  she  can  not  always  make 
the  same  jump,  and  should  she  miss,  striking  against  chair  and  fall  back, 
it  would  likely  mean  the  death  of  her  and  the  pups. 

For  a  few  days  after  being  bred,  quietude  and  exercise  on  chain  is  ad- 
visable for  safety,  and  should  then  follow  exercise  twice  daily,  in  proportion 
to  constitution,  temperament  and  condition,  and  as  she  nears  the  time  of 
whelping,  the  chain  may  be  again  necessary,  as  a  restraint. 

From  the  time  bitch  is  bred,  the  food  need  not  be  different  from  usual 
until  five  or  six  weeks  gone,  and  showing  heavy  with  pUps,  when  she  will 
of  course  need  more  to  eat.  Feed  her  now  more  liberally  with  a  fair  pro- 
portion of  beef  and  mutton.  Raw  beef  cut  up  fine,  is  very  gxrod  in  winter, 
a  little  once  a  day  as  she  approaches  the  time  of  whelping.  Bread  and  milk 
and  especially  soups  will  be  very  good  for  the  other  meals;  soft  foods  and 
of  an  opening  nature  being  desirable.     A  large  beef  or  veal  bone  to  gnaw 
on  is  good.  Plenty  of  milk  is  also  what  she  needs.  The  nearer  her  time 
gets  the  more  she  will  need  to  eat.  Feed  her  three  times  a  day  during  the 
last  two  weeks.  On  the  feeding  of  the  bitch  during  this  time  will  depend 
the  size  and  healthfulness  of  the  coming  litter,  and  when  the  pups  are  born, 
a  warm  pan  of  milk  will  be  relished  by  the  dam,  in  which  may  be  put  a 
little  baking  soda.  Soft  food  should  be  continued  for  a  few  days,  when  a 
return  to  ordinary  diet  will  be  safe. 

Many  times  a  female,  after  giving  birth  to  her  young,  refuses  to  eat 
and  loses  her  appetite.  A  few  drops  of  assafcetida  given  in  water  and  a 
little  rubbed  on  her  gums  usually  restores  her  appetite,  and  with  a  good 
appetite  usually  comes  a  good  flow  of  milk. 

It  is  usually  after  a  lapse  of  sixty-three  days  that  the  pups  come,  and 
some  days  before  the  event  a  suitable  secluded  place  should  be  provided 
for  her.  It  is  important  that  a  record  should  be  kept  of  date  she  was  bred. 
Have  her  stall  or  kennel  prepared  a  week  before  she  is  due.  If  in  winter 
this  must  be  warm,  but  with  light  and  ventilation.  The  latter  must  only 
be  furnished  from  the  top. 

I've  found  the  best  plan  to  be,  to  securely  tack  down  an  old  carpet  or 
blanket. on  the  floor  which  enables  the  puppies  to  get  a  foothold  when  first 
born,  and  thus  crawl  to  their  mother.  The  bitch  will  scratch  and  dig  for 
several  days  before  whelping  and  try  her  best  to  scratch  up  the  carpet,  so 
put  in  plenty  of  tacks.  This  carpet  should  be  exchanged  for  a  clean  one,  the 
next  day  after  she  whelps.  A  little  of  Clayton's  or  the  Vermilax  Co.'s  flea 
powder  sprinkled  around  in  her  box  shoufcl  be  clone  daily.  A  loose  carpet 
in  box  is  not  advisable,  as  a  puppy  is  liable  to  get  under  it  and  get  smothered. 

Not  all  bitches  are  good  mothers,  some  being  too  nervous,  and  through 
this  nervousness  and  from  fear  that  they  may  lose  some  of  their  children, 
or  that  you  might  take  one  away,  they  get  excited,  and  lay  on  a  pup  or  two. 

A  very  safe  plan  I've  found,  and  I  always  so  fit  up  the  stall  or  box, 
is  to  fasten  a  shelf  a  few  inches  from  the  floor  to  the  sides  and  back  of  box, 
extending  out  a  few  inches  so  that  if  she  gets  nervous  and  turns  around  too 
often  to  get  a  place  to  suit  her,  the  pups  are  protected  from  being  laid  on 
by  this  shelf. 

It  is  generally  best  not  to  disturb  the  bitch  at  the  time  of  whelping, 
but  in  case  of  fever  or  excitement,  or,  in  fact,  if  anything  indicating  trouble 
be  detected,  it  may  be  necessary  for  some  one  to  remain  with  her,  and  for 
the  pups  to  be  taken  away  and  kept  warm  until  normal  conditions  return. 
Veterinarian  skill  may  be  necessary  in  some  conditions,  but  as  a  warm  place 
for  the  pups  is  all  that  is  needed  for  a  couple  of  hours  after  birth,  it  is  easy 
to  take  the  milk  from  the  teats  with  the  hand  if  the  fever  is  likely  to  have 
rendered  it  injurious  to  the  pups  and  the  fever  may  be  quickly  remedied, 
and  a  non-injurious  flow  made  in  time  for  the  pups  to  rejoin  their  mother. 

The  very  best  advice  I  can  give  the  breeder  is,  do  not  interfere;  the  few 
cases  where  it  will  be  necessary  to  do  so  will  only  add  force  to  this  rule. 
When  help  is  called  for,  find  a  verterinary  surgeon  who  understands  treat- 
ment of  dogs,  or  one  who  makes  dogs  a  specialty.  Many  veterinarians  are 
all  right  as  to  horses  and  cows,  but  woefully  ignorant  as  to  dogs.  If  manual 
assistance  has  to  be  given,  avoid  unnecessary  force.  When  labor  is  protract- 
ed and  bitch  seems  to  need  assistance  to  create  more  labor  pains,  then  give 
her  Fellows'  Compound  Syrup  of  Hypophosphate,  two  hours  apart;  the  dose 
would  be  a  half  teaspoonful  for  a  bitch  of  15  to  25  lbs.,  and  three-quarters  of 
"a  teaspoonful  for  a  25  to  40-lb.  bitch,  with  a  teaspoonful  for  larger  ones  up 
to  60  lbs.,  while  for  very  large  bitches  such  as  a  St.  Bernard,  a  teaspoonful 
and  a  half  would  be  the  dose.  Get  one  ounce  of  the  Fellows'  Compound 
Syrup  of  Hypophosphate  and  have  your  druggist  add  to  it  four  grains  of 
quinine.  I  have  found  this  very  valuable,  much  better  and  safer  than  ergot 
(the  liquid  extract  of  rye),  which  is  liable  to  work  both  ways,  favorable 
and  otherwise,  expanding  or  contracting  the  womb.  Such  medicine  is  not 
always  necessary,  as  in  very  many  cases  Nature  takes  care  of  the  matter, 
and  it  is  only  needed  and  advised  to  be  given  when  bitch  requires  assistance 
— the  object  being  to  create  more  labor  pains  if  bitch  needs  the  same.  In 
several  cases  of  bitches  that  required  the  Fellows'  Syrup  of  Hypophosphate 

I   also   gave   an   injection   per  vagina   of  glycerine  put   into   hot   water  and 
injected  luke  warm,  but  of  course  not  hot. 

The  cases  of  greatest  danger  are  where  a  bitch  has  been  allowed  to 
stray  during  cestrum,  and  was  bred  to  a  dog  of  much  larger  size  than  her- 
self; and  very  finely  bred  and  highly  pampered  bitches  often  suffer  greatly, 
and  die  in  the  act  of  giving  birth.  In  healthy  parturition  even,  considerable 
time  is  often  occupied,  the  rest  between,  being  of  great  service  in  supporting 
her  against  the  prostration  consequent  in  the  event.  The  bitch  should  not 
be  interfered  with  in  these  intervals,  and  it  is  then  foolish  to  try  and  force 
food  upon  her.  In  all  cases  where  difficulty  from  wrong  presentation  or 
the  disproportioned  size  of  the  pups  occur,  both  from  motives  of  prudence 
and  humanity  the  veterinary  surgeon  should  be  consulted  for  his  obstertic 
knowledge,  and  skill  in  manipultion  will  save  much  unnecessary  suffering, 
and  probably  the  lives  of  mother  and  pups. 

Sometimes  there  are  one  or  two  very  late.  You  may  go  away,  assur- 
ing yourself  all  is  over,  and  that  your  bitch  has  a  litter  of  only  five,  and 
come  back  in  the  morning  to  find  seven  all  sucking  away  like  as  many 
leeches,  and  the  mother  looking  so  proud  and  pleased  she  wouldn't  ex- 
change places  with  a  princess  royal. 

Should  the  clam's  supply  of  milk  prove  to  be  inadequate,  it  will  be 
necessary  either  to  place  her  puppies  under  the  care  of  a  foster  mother 
or  else  to  do  the  best  possible  under  the  circumstances  with  artificial  food. 
The  former  is  always  a  risky  alternative  as  it  is  not  every  bitch  that  will 
take  kindly  to  the  whelps  of  another,  and  unless  she  has  been  upon  the 
premises  for  some  time  so  as  to  be  accustomed  to  the  surroundings  it  is 
unlikely  that  she  will  do  them  justice.  Then,  too,  if  she  has  not  whelped 
at  very  nearly  the  same  time  as  the  other,  there  is  likely  to  be  trouble  over 
her  milk  supply.  Consequently  it  is  safest  and  best,  though  possibly  a  little 
more  troublesome,  to  bring  the  puppies  up  by  hand  if  their  mother  has  not 
enough  milk  to  provide  them    with   nourishment. 

Fortunately,  however,  for  the  dog  owner,  Sprabt's  Patent  step  in  here 
to  assist  him  in  his  dilemma,  as,  in  the  orphan  Puppy  Food  prepared  by  this 
Company,  a  most  excellent  substitute  for  mothers'  milk  will  he  found;  in 
fact,  there  is  nothing  procurable  that  can  compare  with  it.  In  the  case  of 
many  substitutes  for  the  natural  nourishing  fluid  of  pups,  it  will  be  found 
that  the  stomachs  of  the  youngsters  are  liable  to  be  upset  by  some,  while 
in  other  instances  the  puppies  do  not  thrive,  but  in  fact  dwindle  away. 
Wtten  Spratt's  Puppy  Food  is  used  in  a  kennel  there  is  no  prospect  of 
either  of  these  evils,  if  the  food  is  prepared  in  the  proper  manner  and 
ordinary  attention  is  paid  to  matters  of  detail.  In  the  first  place  infant 
puppies  should  be  fed  frequently,  every  care  being  at  the  same  time  taken 
to  avoid  their  stomachs  being  overtaxed.  Then,  too,  it  must  be  remembered 
that  even  the  best  of  cooked  food  is  apt  to  turn  sour  and  become  unwhole- 
some'if  allowed  to  stand  too  long,  or  if  the  vessels  it  is  kept  in  are  not 
perfectly  clean.  The  stomachs  of  young  puppies  are  so  easily  upset  that 
too  much  care  cannot  be  exercised  in  the  preparation  of  their  food.  An 
indigestible  diet  is  no  doubt  responsible  for  many  untimely  deaths  among 
young  stock. 

Provided  that  all  goes  well  with  the  whelps,  they  will  begin  to  crawl  about 
soon  after  their  eyes  are  open,  which  will  be  at  the  age  of  nine  days. 

When  the  pups  are  a  day  old  the  mother  should  be  encouraged  to  leave 
them  for  an  hour's  daily  exercise;  but  this  should  never  be  of  a  violent 
character,  likely  to  cause  milk  fever. 

When  the  pups  ai«e  six  to  seven  weeks  of  age  the  weaning  should  com- 
mence, and  it  is  a  good  plan  to  commence  this  by  removal  of  the  bitch  for 
a  few' hours  at  first,  and  afterward  by  keeping  her  apart  the  whole  day, 
only  permitting  her  to  he  with  the  family  at  night.  The  puns  should  then 
be  fed  on  goat's  or  cow's  milk,  boiled,  with  one-third  as  much  warm  water 
added  and  bread  crumbled  and  soak  in  it  and  given  while  still  slightly 
warm.  I  prefer  condensed  milk  to  either,  which  is  sure  to  be  uniform  and 
not  as  conducive  to  worms  as  cow's  milk.  This  should  be  slightly  reduced 
with  warm  water.     After  a  few  days,  and  when  the  pups  have  taken  to  this 

diet  a  little  meal  may  be  used  instead  of  bread;  oatmeal,  wheat  middlings 
and  cornmeal,  mixed,  is  good;  and  in  case  of  looseness  of  the  bowels  a 
little  rice  should  be  substituted.  At  this  period  it  is  also  well  to  add  a 
little  lime  water  to  the  milk  or  give  fish  scraps,  for  this  supplies  phos- 
phorous necessary  for  bone  forming.  If  fish  is  given  be  careful  and  sure 
that  all  bones  are  first  removed.  Pups  thus  fed  rarely  get  rickets,  or  the 
giving  way  of  the  pasterns  or  lower  leg  joints,  because  the  bone  is  not 
strong  enough  to  carry  the  weight  of  the  body.  This  should  never  occur 
in  any  well-regulated  kennel  where  the  pups  are  properly  nourished,  but  if 
it  does,  two-thirds  of  lime  water  with  the  milk,  a  teaspoonful  of  cod  liver 
oil  twice  daily,  or  more  if  the  breed  is  a  large  one,  will  soon  remedy  it. 
After  awhile  soups  and  a  little  vegetable  matter  may  be  substituted. 

I  give  puppies  when  weaning  them  boiled  milk  in  which  some  bread 
has  been  well  mixed  and  soaked,  gravy  with  bread  mixed  in  it — chicken 
gravy  they  eat  with  a  relish — and  a  little  later  on,  add  to  the  milk  and 
bread,  or  gravy  and  bread,  just  a  little  cooked,  and  cut  up  fine,  beef  or  mut- 
ton. Remember,  however,  that  after  a  pup  once  gets  a  taste  of  meat  tbat 
it  is  very  liable  to  want  meat  and  refuse  anything  else.  See  article  on 
Feeding. 

In  case  of  the  mother  dying  a  few  days  after  birth  of  her  puppies, 
always  use  condensed  milk  thinned  with  warm  water  and  add  lime  water 
at  the. rate  of  a  teaspoonful  for  each  puppy.  Lime  water  is  one  of  the  best 
worm  destroyers  for  young  puppies. 

Should  a  mother  dog  lose  her  milk  or  not  have  enough  at  any  time 
after  a  puppy  has  its  eyes  open,  make  a  gruel  of  corn  starch,  putting  a 
little  sugar  in  it;  teach  the  little  fellows  to  eat  it,  which  can  be  readily  done 
by  putting  their  noses  in  it  and  allowing  them  to  lick  their  lips,  and  you 
will  find  them  to  soon  learn  to  like  it  and  thrive  on  it.  Or,  feed  them  with 
Spratt's  Orphan  Puppy  Food,  as  mentioned  previously. 

When  I  have  a  litter  of  puppies  that  are  weak  in  bone,  their  legs  not 
strong  enough  to  sustain  the  body,  I  give  the  mother  three  times  a  day  until 
pups  are  weaned,  some  precipitated  phosphate  of  lime  which  creates  bone. 
Dose  for  toy  dogs,  a  pug  for  instance,  would  be  an  even  teaspoonful.  For 
dogs  the  size  of  a  pointer,  one  and  a  half  teaspoonful,  and  for  large  breeds 
like  a  St.  Bernard  or  mastiff,  two  teaspoonfuls.  Mix  the  lime  up  In  a  little 
milk  and  all  bitches  will  readily  drink  it  down,  as  it  is  of  a  pleasant  taste. 
Better,  however,  do  the  mixing  where  they  do  not  see  you,  for  if  they  got 
the  idea  that  it  was  medicine  they  might  not  take  it.  Many  a  dog  will  run 
and  hide  at  the  sight  of  a  spoon,  so  great  being  their  aversion  to  taking 
medicine. 

Other  troubles  sometimes  arise  at  this  time,  which  are  often  caused  by 
worms,  but  still  more  frequently  result  from  unsuitable  food  or  foods  of 
innocent  nature  that  have  undergone  noxious  changes,  and  still  oftener  by 
overloading  the  stomach,  until  indigestion  sets  in  and  then  the  food,  Instead 
of  supplying  nutriment,  becomes  an  irritant;  pains  arise,  swelling  of  the 
organs  occur,  and  unless  quickly  relieved  the  pups  quickly  succumb.  These 
symptoms  are  usually  attributed  to  worms,  which  frequently  cause  similar 
troubles.  Another  difficulty  with  like  symptoms  is  a  slight  chill,  sending  the 
blood  from  the  surface  to  the  internal  organs,  producing  congestion  therein, 
and  it  is  sometimes  that  serious  disorders,  not  easily  distinguished  from 
any  of  these,  are  caused  by  worm  remedies  being  given,  without  knowledge 
of  their  effects,  or  due  preparation  on  the  part  of  the  patient.  All  these 
troubles  may  be  classed  as  gastro-enteritis,  and  the  same  treatment  applied. 
There  should  be  an  immediate  cleaning  out  of  the  bowels  with  castor  or 
sweet  oil,  and  the  use  of  opiates  afterward  generally  give  best  results, 
either  paregoric  or  laudanum,  the  former  preferred,  because  of  the  camphor 
in  it. 

The  opiate  should  be  given  every  hour,  until  the  pain  is  relieved,  and 
then  nourishment  in  the  form  of  warm  milk  should  follow,  with  the  appli- 
cation of  artificial  heat,  or  stimulation,  in  case  of  any  tendency  to  chill. 

Raw  milk  should  never  be  given  to  any  puppies,  always  boil  or  scald 
it.     Under  the  heading  of  "Worms,"  you  can  now  find  proper  treatment  for 
puppies. 

The  following  article  on  "Parturition,"  and  a  valuable  one  indeed — ■ 
coming  from  the  pen  of  Dr.  A.  J.  Sewell,  the  celebrated  English  dog  veter- 
inarian, was  lately  published  in  the  American  Stock-Keeper,  and  I  herewith 
reproduce  it: 

"So  little  practical  knowledge  on  this  subject  is  abroad  in  our  kennels, 
judging  from  the  large  number  of  dams  and  puppies  that  have  been  annu- 
ally lost,  that  it  is  important  when  we  come  across  such  articles  as  Mr.  A.  J. 
Sewell's,  the  noted  English  dog  'Vet.,'  on  the  above  subject,  that  others  than 
the  readers  of  the  English  Kennel  Gazette  should  be  allowed  an  opportunity 
to  read  them.  From  such  hints  the  intelligent  Kennel  man  may  prepare 
himself  to  meet  emergencies  which  can  not  be  foreseen,  and  which  often 
happen  when  a  'vet's'  services  are  not  immediately  available.  The  follow- 
ing will  meet  such  cases:  "  'It  occasionally  happens  in  cases  of  head  pre- 
sentation that  the  hind  legs  are  bent  forward  on  the  body,  which  renders  the 
delivery  difficult,  and  without  the  passage  is  large  and  the  pains  are  very 
strong,  the  bitch  cannot  bring  the  pup  without  assistance.  This  is  best 
rendered  by  grasping  the  puppy  across  the  hips  with  a  small  pair  of  thin- 
bladed  parturition  forceps,  and  by  gently  pulling  at  the  puppy  during  each 
throe. 

"  'It  frequently  occurs  that  though  a  puppy  may  lie  in  a  normal  position 
the  mother  is  unable  to  give  birth  to  it,  in  consequence  of  its  being  too 
large.  The  nose  may  be  just  inside  the  vagina,  and  there  become  fixed  in 
spite  of  the  bitch  straining  for  hours.  I  have  seen  hundreds  of  such  cases. 
It  is  a  mistake  to  leave  these  cases  too  long,  thinking  they  will  come  all 
right,  as  it  is  wasting  time  and  the  mother's  strength;  and  if  there  are 
other  puppies  to  some  she  probably  will  not  have  strength  either  to  expel 
them  herself,  or  help  anyone  who  may  try  to  assist  her. 

"'In  these  instances  the  head  is  so  firmly  fixed  in  the  mouth  of  the 
womb  that  it  is  impossible  to  take  hold  of  it  with  forceps,  however  small 
or  thin  the  blades  may  be,  but  the  hook  of  the  crochet  may  generally  be 
passed  into  the  mouth  of  the  puppy,  and  by  fixing  it  well  into  the  pallet  a 
good  hold  may  be  obtained,  and  the  puppy  drawn  through  the  passage  by 
main  force.  If  care  be  taken  it  is  astonishing  what  amount  of  force  may 
be  used  in  promoting  delivery  without  at  all  injuring  the  bitch,  but  it  is 
best  not  to  pull  on  the  puppy  except  during  the  labor  pains,  if  there  are  any. 

"  'It  is  the  custom  of  some  veterinary  surgeons  to  give  the  ditch  during 
labor  a  hot  bath  if  the  parts  are  not  considered  sufficiently  relaxed  or  if 
the  pains  are  dull;  at  the  proper  time  the  tissues  always  do  become  prop- 
erly and  sufficiently  dilated,  providing  that  parts  are  in  a  normal  state — 
that  is,  bar  a  stricture  in  the  vagina  or  something  of  that  kind — and  if 
there  is  any  abnormal  condition  a  warm  bath,  in  my  opinion,  does  more 
harm  than  good,  by  often  checking  the  pains. 

"  'Sometimes  when  ergot  fails  to  induce  or  stimulate  the  throe — (here 
is  where  I  mucJi  prefer  to  use  the  Fellows'  Compound  Syrup  of  Hypo- 
phosphate) — I  irave  applied  with  advantage  to  the  abdomen  an  ice  bag;-  but 
what  I  fteid  the  best  of  all  when  one  or  two  subcutaneous  injections  of  ergo- 
tine  have  not  worked  satisfactorily,  is  to  put  the  bitch  in  some  vehicle  and 
give  her  a  drive,  and  if  nothing  else  will  induce  the  labor  pains  this  will 
do  so  in  most  cases. 

"  'The  worst  cases  are  those  which  when  the  bitch  is  due  to  pup  and 
the  parts  become  relaxed,  there  are  no  labor  pains  to  expel  the  fceta.  Ex- 
amined per  vaginum  no  puppy  can  be  felt  and  no  amount  of  excitement  of 
the  parts  by  passing  a  cold  instrument  into  the  passage  or  injection  of 
ergot  will  cause  contraction  of  the  womb.  If  the  patient  seems  all  right 
it  is  best  to  wait  some  hours,  during  which  time  everything  should  be  done 
to  try  and  excite  contraction  of  the  parts.  If  the  means  taken  do  not 
succeed,  then  there  is  nothing  to  be  done  except  the  Csesarean  operation, 
as  it  is  not  safe  to  attempt  delivery  with  forceps  or  crochet  when  the  pup- 
pies cannot  be  felt  with  the  finger.' 

"Then  follows  a  description  of  the  Csesarean  operation,  which,  of  course, 
no  one  but  an  experienced  veterinary  surgeon  should  be  allowed  to  perform; 
so  it  is  not  necessary  to  give  it  here. 

"Prolapsus  or  inversion  of  the  womb  or  uterus  into  the  vagina  some- 
times, but  very  rarely,  occurs  during  parturition,  due  to  very  severe  strain- 
ing, or  as  the  result  of  too  much  force  being  used  to  remove  a  puppy  with 
forceps  or  by  other  artificial  means.  Care  must  be  taken  in  these  cases 
not  to  mistake  protrusion  of  the  uterus  with  prolapsus  of  the  vagina,  or  a 
polypus.  The  latter  may  be  recognized  as  a  solid  pear-shaped  body  with 
a  narrow  neck,  whilst  a  prolapsed  vagina  is  generally  a  large  solid  oval 
body  which  almost  fills  the  vaginal  canal  if  it  does  not  protrude  externally; 
it  has  a  broad  base  and  rises  at  the  back  part  of  the  passage  just  behind 
the  meatus  or  opening  of  the  bladder.  The  uterus  is  soft,  reducible,  and 
rough  and  tubular  in  shape,  besides  showing  dark-colored  patches  where 
the  placentae  have  been  attached. 

"After  the  womb  has  been  cleansed  by  being  sponged  with  a  weak, 
tepid  solution  of  Condy's  Fluid  or  permanganate  of  potash,  it  should,  if 
possible,  be  returned  by  gentle  pressure  on  the  fundus  of  the  uterus  with  a 
piece  of  whalebone  with  the  point  covered  with  sponge;  the  returning  is 
assisted  if  the  hind  legs  are  raised  in  part  by  the  bitch  being  held  upside 
down.  Care  must  be  taken  not  to  use  undue  force  or  the  uterus  may  be 
ruptured.  After  the  return  it  is  a  good  plan  to  inject  a  quantity  of  cold 
water  into  the  vagina  to  act  as  an  astringent. 

"When  the  protruding  uterus  shows  signs  of  having  been  injured  or 
is  much  congested,  or  decomposition  has  set  in,  amputation  is  advisable. 
This  is  best  done  by  drawing  the  part  gently  out  and  applying  a  strong  lig- 
ature as  high  up  as  possible  and  cutting  off  the  free  portion." 

In  the  June  number  of  the  Kennel  Gazette  (Eng.)  Mr.  Sewell  takes  up 
the  care  of  the  mother  and  puppies,  and,  judging  from  the  serious  losses 
which  occur  in  almost  every  kennel  from  carelessness,  or  worse,  kennel 
managers  cannot  read  the  following  too  carefully,  and  even  the  veterans 
may  gain  a  wrinkle  or  two: 

"When  the  bitch  has  finished  pupping  she  should  be  made  comfortable 
by  renewing  her  bedding  and  given  some  warm  milk.  As  to  the  bedding, 
there  is  nothing  better  than  straw,  laid  straight  across  the  box  and  changed 
daily.  I  do  not  like  mats  or  cloths  even  for  small  dogs  in  these  cases,  for 
they  become  so  quickly  foul.  When  the  bitch  has  had  a  large  litter  or 
has  had  a  bad  time,  it  is  a  good  plan  to  give  the  yolk  of  an  egg,  beaten  up 
with  milk  and  a  little  brandy;  or,  if  the  bitch  is  inclined  to  vomit,  some  beef 
tea  or  Bovine — a  small  quantity  every  hour.  This  may  even  be  occasionally 
given  before  the  bitch  has  finished  having  all  her  puppies,  if  she  appears 
very  exhausted.  A  few  hours  later  in  ordinary  cases,  when  all  is  going 
well,  some  thin  oatmeal  gruel,  which  is  the  best  food  for  the  next  two  or 
three  days,  may  be  given.  When  the  bitch  seems  disinclined  to  take  suf- 
ficient milk  gruel,  sheep's  head'  broth,  thickened  with  fine  oatmeal,  may 
be  ordered,  and  even  bread  and  milk  or  gravy.  After  the  third  day,  more 
.solid  food  may  be  given,  as  crushed  biscuit  or  boiled  rice,  with  sheep's  head 
broth  and  .the  meat  from  the  bones  added;  also  a  little  fish,  and  if  the 
bitiJh  is  not  feeding  well,  milk  may  be  given  to  drink  instead  of  water.  As 
time  goes  on,  especially  when  there  is  a  large  litter,  more  nourishment  is 
required,  and  the  food  must  be  increased  by  degrees  so  that  the  bitch 
is  kept  in  fairly  good  condition,  though  of  course  not  made  fat,  or  the 
secretion  of  milk  may  be  checked  and  the  puppies  will  suffer. 

Some  bitches  are  so  zealous  in  their  care  of  the  puppies,  more  espe- 
cially at  first,  that  their  health  suffers  in  consequence.  In  such  cases  the 
dam  must  be  made  to  go  out  to  relieve  herself,  particularly  the  bladder.  I 
have  seen  very  severe  cases  of  illness  caused  by  the  mother  not  leaving  her 
puppies,  and  in  two  instances  death  was  the  result  of  the  bladder  becom- 
ing over-distended  and  not  being  emptied.  The  condition  of  the  bowels 
also  sometimes  requires  attention,  but,  as  a  rule,  when  the  bitch  has  been 
allowed  to  follow  her  natural  desires  and  she  has  eaten  the  foetal  mem- 
branes, the  bowels  are  often  relaxed  in  the  course  of  a  day  or  two,  and  so 
long  as  it  is  not  severe,  no  notice  may  be  taken  of  it,  but  when  there  is much  purging  it  is  a  good  plan  to  give  a  small  dose  of  castor  oil  to  carry 
it  off  and  if  after  this  has  worked  off,  very  loose  motions  continue  and 
are  frequently  passed,  some  carbonate  of  bismuth,  from  five  to  fifteen 
grains  shaken  dry  on  the  tongue,  may  be  given  three  or  four  times  a  day. 
In  these  cases  the  milk,  or  broth,  should  be  thickened  with  arrowroot  in- 
stead of  oatmeal  so  long  as  the  bowels  continue  troublesome. 

After  pupping,  a  bitch  naturally  has  a  great  deal  of  discharge  from 
the  womb,  which  continues,  as  a  rule,  for  about  a  fortnight,  sometimes  a 
good  deal  longer.  I  find  it  a  good  plan  when  the  last  puppy  is  born  to 
syringe  the  uterus  out  with  a  tepid  solution  of  permanganate  of  potash. 
When  the  discharge  is  very  copious  and  offensive,  it  is  a  good  plan  to  repeat 
the  syringing  every  day  for  the  first  week;  and  the  coat  surrounding  the 
passage,  when  the  bitch  does  not  keep  herself  clean,  should  be  washed  oc- 
casionally with  warm  water  and  carbolic  soap  and  afterwards  carefully 
dried.  —   *««« 

When  the  discharge  from  the  passage  continues  after  three  weeks, 
astringent  injections  are  necessary,  as  a  teaspoonful  of  powdered  burnt  alum 
dissolved  in  a  pint  of  tepid  water  and  repeated  morning  and  evening. 

Occasionally,  after  the  usual  discharge  has  ceased,  a  bitch  will  have 
a  blood-like  discharge,  the  same  as  is  seen  in  bitches  when  in  oestrum,  and 
this  may  continue  for  weeks.  It  is  due  to  a  relaxed  condition  of  the  parts, 
and  when  very  profuse  the  bitch  becomes  much  emaciated  and  weakened. 
The  alum  injection  should  be  given  and  from  two  to  five  drops  of  witch 
hazel  bark,  administered  three  times  a  day  in  a  little  water.  When  this 
does  not  stop  the  discharge,  ergotine,  from  cne-half  to  two  grains,  made 
into  a  pill,  may  be  given  twice  a  day. 

The  mammary  or  milk  glands  often  require  attention,  more  especially 
if  all,  or  nearly  ail,  the  puppies  die.  Then  the  milk,  which  often  accumu- 
lates in  quantities,  becomes,  as  it  were,  caseated,  the  glands  are  swollen, 
inflamed  and  very  tender  and  abscesses  may  form.  The  same  thing  some- 
times occurs  when  the  bitch  has  a  large  litter,  in  one  or  more  glands,  the 
puppies  seeming  to  take  a  dislike  to  the  milk  in  these  parts;  or  perhaps  the 
parts  are  tender  and  the  bitch  refuses  to  let  the  puppies  suck  there.  Many 
bitches  who  have  never  been  in  pup,  or  even  served  by  a  dog,  often  have 
a  large  accumulation  of  milk  about  nine  weeks  after  being  in  heat,  and 
unless  the  parts  are  carefully  watched  to  see  the  glands  do  not  become 
swollen  and  hard,  a  good  deal  of  trouble  may  follow,  and  subsequently 
gradular  tumors  form,   necessitating  an   operation. 

When  the  glands  become  swollen  and  inflamed,  hot  water  fomentations 
should  be  applied  three  or  four  times  a  day,  and  after  each  fomentation 
the  glands,  especially  the  hard  lumps,  should  be  rubbed  with  warm  cam- 
phorated oil,  and  the  milk  drawn  off.  Castor  oil  should  be  given  also 
every  three  or  four  days.  When  the  bitch  affected  is  rearing  uppies,  it  is 
necessary  to  wash  the  camphorated  oil  off  with  warm  water  and  soap  before 
she  is  allowed  to  return  to  the  little  ones. 

.  While  some  bitches  have  too  much  milk,  others  have  none  at  all; 
the  latter  conditions  may  only  continue  for  a  day  or  two,  but  sometimes 
it  i&  permanent,  and  though  the  mother  may  be  anxious  to  nurse  the  pup- 
pies, she  is  unable  to  do  so.  In  such  cases  treatment  is  of  little  use;  a 
diet  of  oatmeal  gruel  and  boiled  fish  may  be  tried,  and  is  occasionally 
successful.  In  other  instances  when  this  has  failed,  I  have  found  a  stim- 
ulating diet  of  lean  raw  meat  of  some  use. 

Bitches  of  a  nervous  disposition,  especially  those  of  the  smaller  breeds 
of  dogs,  are  occasionally  subject  to  convulsions  when  nursing  puppies. 
It  is  generally  put  down  to  weeakness,  but  I  do  not  think  this  is  the  cause, 
for  I  have  seen  these  attacks  occur  when  the  mother  has  been  in  good 
condition  and  when   only  rearing  two  or  three  puppies. 

The  complaint  is  called  parturient  eclampsia,  and  though  the  symptoms 
are  very  distressing,  it  is  very  seldom  that  death  occurs  as  a  result.  The 
only  signs  are  restlessness  and  excitement,  the  bitch  keeps  leaving  her 
puppies  and  walks  about  panting.  Presently  she  falls  over  on  her  side, 
the  whole  body  being  convulsed,  looking  very  much  like  an  animal  which has  been  poisoned  with  strychnine.  The  legs  are  stretched-  out  and  rigid, 
the  tail  is  often  curled  tightly  over  the  back  and  the  head  is  drawn  back. 
The  mouth  is  generally  kept  wide  open,  the  dog  panting  violently,  but 
there  is  no  loss  of  consciousness. 

With  respect  to  treatment,  it  is  seldom  medicine  can  be  given  by  the 
mouth  in  these  cases,  but  when  it  is  possible,  a  large  dose  of  bromide  of 
potassium — say  one  scruple  for  a  bitch  the  size  of  a  fox  terrier,  in  a  table- 
spoonful  of  water,  should  be  given.  Great  care  must  be  used  in  giving 
the  liquid,  or  the  patient  will  be  choked.  The  bromide  may  be  repeated 
in  an  hour.  When  it  is  impossible  to  give  the  medicine  by  the  mouth,  an 
enema,  containing  hydrated  chloral  should  be  used.  The  dose  for  a  dog 
the  size  of  a  fox  terrier,  in  an  urgent  case  like  this,  should  be  half  a  dram 
dissolved  in  about  four  tablespoonfuls  of  warm  water  and  given  when  tepid. 

Smaller  dogs — say  spaniels  and  Yorkshire  terriers — may  have  a  scru- 
ple of  chloral  dissolved,  of  course  in  less  water.  When  the  attack  has 
passed  off,  to  prevent  a  recurence  it  is  advisable  to  give  a  course  of  bromide 
— say  from  three  to  five  grains  for  dogs  the  size  of  toy  spaniels  and  fox 
terriers  in  a  little  water  three  or  four  times  a  day,  and  feed  on.  a  light 
diet,  as  bread  and  milk,  or  the  latter  thickened  with  Genger's  food. 

If  the  convulsions  do  return  the  puppies  ought  to  be  weaned  and 
means  taken  to  disperse  the  milk.  Trouble  sometimes  occurs  in  doing  this 
even  when  the  puppies  have  been  gradually  weaned,  and  such  is  particu- 
larly the  case  when  bitches  have  milk  without  having  puppies.  Aperient 
medicines  should  always  be  given,  castor  oil  being  the  best.  A  full  dose 
should  be  administered  about  every  four  days.  The  glands  should  be  rub- 
bed twice  a  day  with  camphorated  spirits,  or  the  balsam  of  Peru  ointment. 
What  suits  one  dog  does  not  always  suit  another,  therefore  when  the  milk 
does  not  seem  to  be  dispersing  as  quickly  as  it  should,  other  external  rem- 
edies may  be  tried,  as  rubbing  the  glands  with  whisky  or  brandy,  or  even 
eau-de-cologne,  and  I  have  often  had  good  success  by  dabbing  the  glands 
frequently  with   the   following  simple  lotion   applied   cold : 

Recipe. — Methylated  spirits  (wood  alcohol)  one  ounce;  cold  water  eight 
ounces. 

The  milk,  unless  it  is  secreted  in  very  large  quantitiesV-'and  is  caus- 
ing pain,  or  is  becoming  hard,  should  not  be  drawn  off,  as  to  do  so  only 
stimulates  the  secretion.  Sometimes  these  cases  are  extreme-ly  obstinate 
and  will  last  five  or  six  weeks,  or  even  longer.  In  such  Iiista'ricies,  iodide  of 
soda  is  useful  in  closes  from  half  to  two  grains,  according  to  the  size  of 
the  bitch,  given  in  a  little  water,  and  repeated  twice  daily;  •  The  diet  in 
these  cases  should  be  light  and  of  a  stimulating  character,  as  bread  and 
milk,   dry  biscuits,  milk  pudding,  etc." 

One  never  knows  when  some  untoward  circumstance  will  arise  in 
parturition.  Pups  come  the  wrong  way,  are  too  large,,  or  something  or  other 
happens  that  nonplusses  even  the  best  of  us  sometimes. 

A  bitch  should  be  made  to  come  out  to  empty,  herself,  if  only  for  a 
few  moments  on  the  first  day,  or  if  she  whelps  at  night,  then  on  the  next 
day,  as  many  bitches  through  strong  maternal  instinct,  love  for  their  pup- 
pies, and  through  fear  that  some  harm  may  befall  her  children,  will  often 
"hold  in"  and  damage  result  from  no  relief  to  the  kidneys  or  stomach. 

The  following  is  copied  from  the  American  Field,  and-is  valuable  on 
this  subject: 

"Bitches  at  such  times  often  become  a  little  distressed,  when  their 
labor  is  at  hand,  and  will  crawl  or  creep  into  any  hole  or  corner  in  order 
to  seek  relief,  and  will  sometimes  whelp  in  the  most  unsuitable  places — ■ 
on  a  cold  floor,  for  instance.  The  bench  should  be  protected  on  all  sides, 
so  that  the  puppies  are  not  subject  to  the  danger  of  being  thrown  "over- 
board," and  the  bench  should  not  be  too  large,  for  fear  of  the  puppies 
getting  pushed  away  from  their  dam  and  getting  cold,  before  they  are 
properly  dry.     Dry,  clean  wheat  straw  makes  the  best  bedding. 

"The  latter  contingency  is  one  that  frequently  happens.  While  the 
earlier  puppies  are  yet  moist  they  are  pushed  away  from  their  dam  in 
her   efforts   to   give   birth   to    succeeding   puppies,    cold    strikes   into    their 
tender  little  system,  they  gradually  lose  the  vigor  which  Nature  has  given 
them  to  aid  them  in  securing  the  dam's  teats,  and  drawing  from  them 
their  natural  sustenance,  they  whine,  and  gradually  pine  away  and  die, 
to  the  consternation  and  dismay  of  an  anxious  and  expectant  owner. 

"Some  breeders,  in  order  to  avert  the  possibility  of  what  we  have 
just  described,  take  away  the  puppies  as  they  are  born  into  a  kitchen, 
saddle  room  or  other  place,  in  which  there  is  a  fire  to  dry  them,  putting 
them  back  when  the  bitch  has  either  finished  whelping,  or  at  intervals  of 
rest  from  her  labor. 

"A  bitch,  shortly  before  she  is  due  to  whelp  and  afterward,  should  be 
kept  upon  sloppy  food  rather,  such  as  porridge  and  milk,  bread  and  milk, 
hound  meal  soaked  in  sheep's  head  broth,  etc.  While  whelping  she  should 
simply  be  given  some  warm  milk.  The  bitch  should  be  allowed  out  Tor 
a  short  run  of  a  few  minutes  on  the  second  day,  the  duration  of  which 
may  be  increased  each  day. 

"The  secret  of  success  in  rearing  puppies  is  fresh  air,  pure  water, 
free  and  unrestrained  exercise,  good  food,  given  often  and  a  little  at  a 
time,  access  to  grass,  and  a  dry,  warm  bed  at  night.  The  fewer  puppies 
are  kept  in  kennels  the  better,  and  the  more  the  foregoing  table  of  hygiene 
can  be  observed  the  better  will  puppies  come  on." 

Especially  should  the  puppy  quarters  be  kept  sweet  and  clean,  for 
a  dozen  flies  will  take  more  out  of  suckling  puppies  than  a  night's  rest 
will  put  back.  Here  is  where  a  cool  cellar  or  other  darkened  building  will 
be  found  almost  imperative  when  the  mercury  is  trying  to  do  a  century. 
The  brooding  quarters  should  be  kept  cool  and  in  semi-gloom,  and  more 
than  ordinary  attention  should  be  paid  to  cleanliness  of  the  bedding  so  as 
not  to  attract  flies.  Next  to  worms  there  is  nothing  more  irritating  and 
calculated  to  retard  a  puppy's  well  doing  than  flies. 